『人類学研究所 研究論集』第 3 号（2016） 
165 
 
 
 
The Sakata Society in the Congo 
Socio-Political and Religious Organizational Patterns 
 
Roger Vanzila Munsi 
 
 
Key words 
Sakata society , matrilineal kinship system, socio-political organization, religious 
determinants, time-persistent patterns, changes 
 
 
Introduction 
 
The Sakata constitute a substantial minority of ethnographically recorded societies in the 
hinterland of the Democratic Republic of Congo  (formerly Zaïre, henceforth Congo). 1 It is 
of signal importance that research is conducted to further explore and re interpret their 
original cultural identity  and current experiences. This article provides an important 
opportunity to  highlight the singularity of some salient socio-political and religious 
constructs that define and determine the Sakata in their present localities , and to forge a 
connection between these significant characteristics . Employing data triangulation at the 
micro-level of analysis , I hope, among other things,  to demonstrate how time-persistent 
patterns of socio-political and religious  life have been significant in identifying and 
preserving Sakata society, despite the changes brought about by colonialism, decolonization, 
neo-colonialism, state hegemony, urbanization and autonomization of social fields, as well 
as the spread of Christia nity and global culture in to the region  between the nineteenth 
century and the present.   
The synthesis draws on ethnographic data gleaned from two Congolese settings , namely 
the Mabie Chiefdom  and Bandundu  City, on various dates between 2003 and 200 7; 2009 
                                                   
1 The Sakata speak of themselves as Basakata (singular Musakata) and their language as Kisakata. However, 
I omit herein the prefix ‘Ba”, except in some  instances of quotations , in the interest of simplicity . Studies on 
the existence or non -existence of the terminology Basakata in pre-colonial Sakata communities are too scarce 
to allow us to draw any definite conclusions from it. However, it is a valuable  clue in our investigations that 
the ethnonym “musakata” or “ mosakata” probably derived from the verb ‘ zaa boi” (to inhabit) and from the 
Lingala word “ kati” (middle, centre). Given the prefix “ moba”, its origin would be “ mosakata” (plural 
basakati), meani ng “inhabiting in the middle”, a formulation that would refer to the present geographical 
location of Sakata homeland (Bayens 1913 -1914, IV: 160). Throughout  this article, I have, on the basis of a 
great deal of valuable information, represented the Sakata  as a matrilineal society. It would be incorrect, 
however, to claim that they are patrilineal society, as Tonnoir (1970) did, perhaps for lack of sufficient 
ethnographic evidence.  
 
Research Papers of the Anthropological Institute Vol.3 (2016) 
166 
 
and 2015 . For data collection, I chose these two field -sites because of my extensive 
experience of living and working in the region. The Mabie Chiefdom  is home to 
approximately 50 small subsistence farming villages located in the  Sector of Mfimi that 
belongs to the present-day Kutu District (Mai-Ndombe Province ) in western Congo . Apart 
from the purely practical consideration of  ease of access, it was typical for this case study 
because the Sakata formed the mass of the population. Bandundu City  (headquarter of 
Kwilu Province) is located on the Kwan go R iver, between the Kwilu and Kasai Rivers, 
about 432 km from Kinshasa (the national capital and largest city) in the central-west of the 
Congo. It i s divided into three large administrative areas (Basoko, Disas i and Mayoyo) 
known as Communes. Within each of these communes  there is a further geographical 
division into Quartiers. More recently, however, the city has continued to expand through 
new large residential  and commercial developments. Its population is made up of about 20 
ethnic groups speaking different Bantu  languages. Christianity is the majority religion in 
the area, followed by Kimbanguism (officially “ the Church of Christ on Earth ” founded by 
the prophet Simon  Kimbangu), and traditional religions. I chose this site because  I noticed 
there a great number of long-term Sakata residents and more transient Sakata household s. 
Interestingly, pilot research has shown that  they have brought with them religious  beliefs, 
therapeutic techniques, relic veneration,  and social forms of the Sakata, using the cherished 
traditional resources  to set going something local but something recognizably African .  
Sixty-five Sakata households (45 in rural and 20 in urban settings) agreed to participate in 
the research and a tot al of forty individuals from these households participate d in the 
interviews. Over half of the participants were male. These Sakata households were chosen 
because of the level of participation in various socio -political and religious activities and the 
importance ascribed to their historically recorded past and some changing social conditions 
in the presen t. Within this sample, s pecialist informants, who  provided relevant points of 
view on the aspects researched,  included the traditional political chief and  village chiefs of 
Mabie chiefdom, and elderly persons of different localities. R egular informants, who have a 
far-reaching knowledge of local history and culture, in cluded local officials, social workers , 
eminent academics, and persons repre senting the yo unger generation. Almost half of the 
participants had live d in the region all their lives. Sakata participants who engaged in 
subsistence farming accounted for almost three quarters of the sample. Given the nature of 
the r esearch aims, I decided  that parti cipants should be over 18 years of age to assure 
meaningful responses.  
The research was conducted in the Lingala and Kikongo languages (two of the four 
national languages spoken in the region) as well as in the Kisakata language  and in French 
(the officia l language)  as needs demanded .2 Data collection was conducted in a flexible 
manner, within a multi-method approach (David &Sutton 2004; Axinn & Pearce 2006; 
Maxwell 1996; Russell 2006) , in order to access different types of data so as to complete the 
                                                   
2 Kikongo, Lingala, Kiswahili and Tshiluba are the Congo’s four national la nguages. 
『人類学研究所 研究論集』第 3 号（2016） 
167 
 
required ‘picture’ of the present -day Sakata society. At all phases I worked with four 
qualified Sakata research assistants  (two from the Mabie chiefdom and two others from the 
Mbantin and Batere chiefdoms  respectively). The two-hour semi -structured interviews 
focused on the socio-religious and political systems of the Sakata, and historical events that 
have befallen them. The opened -ended, unstructured interviews  (Mattson & Stage 2003)  
were conducted in the home with single households and key informants togethe r. The 
interviews were tape d and transcribed for the purposes of analysis. In addition, two focus 
group discussions were held with women from different age grou ps. In the process, I  
scrupulously review ed all the relevant data. Every year, during the period  of the study, key 
informants in rural and urban areas were then re -interviewed to obtain additional 
information and to make comparisons . On some occasions, however, the country’s  political 
unrest/turmoil and social insecurity which  disabled means of trans portation prevented my 
access to some of my intended  interviewees. Secondary data  were also used, whenever 
available, to contextualize the key outputs of the assessment.  Data gathered through 
different methods therefore allowed triangulation of various dat asets and contributed to the 
reliability of data analysis.  
 Within the sampling strategy adopted, I particularly tried to understand various aspects 
of their society and religion, perceptions and lived experiences from the members’ point of 
view—not merely  analyzing them from a third -person perspective. The term ‘religion’ is 
used herein merely to denote ‘a covenant faith community with teachings and narratives 
that enhance the search for the sacred and encourage morality (Dollahite 1998:5).  Three 
main integrated and interrelated themes surveying past and recent research drive the 
analysis forward.  I argue that t he matrilineal  kinship ideology and religious forms 
constitute dynamic forces at the foundation of the Sakata culture . It is precisely in terms of 
this enduring interdependence between these two areas of their social and religious life that 
the Sakata have  increasingly ensured the combination of adaptation and continuity in their 
present localit ies.  
 
1. Ethnographic Background of the Sakata  
 
1.1 Identification and Geographical Location 
In his seminal work (1966 a), Belgian Anthropologist Jan Vansina classifies the Sakata as 
part of the  Lower Kasai  Bantu-speakers found in the hinterland of the Congo . This 
heterogeneous group of Bantu-speaking peoples indeed forms what he c alls the 
‘Boma-Sakata cultural clusters’ (peoples sharing features of social structure, material 
culture and worldviews) which includes the Nku and several ethnic groups broken up into 
small political fragments . These diverse groups  speak different though related languages 
and have different histories, socio -political organizations, cultural and religious practices  
(For further details, see Birmingham 1981:87 -93; Vansina 1966b; 1992; 1994; 1995; 1999).   
Within the Mai-Ndombe Province (Figure 1.1), the Sakata corporate land  (Figure 1.2) is 
Research Papers of the Anthropological Institute Vol.3 (2016) 
168 
 
precisely located in the Kutu District ( 19,237 km² ). There it covers an area of roughly 
180,000 km ² bounded in the north by the Mfimi and Lukenie Rivers, and in the south by 
the Kasai River which flows into the Congo River , the second largest  river in the World in 
terms of freshwater discharge (1457 km ³ yr-1).3 The vast area forms an isosceles triangle , 
starting in the west at Mushie District with a latitude of about 2.30˚, at the  confluence of 
the Mfimi and Kasai Rivers, and ending in the east at the Lukolela River with a longitude 
of about 17˚, where the Sakata share borders with their neighbors, the Nkundo-Ipanga. The 
length of the whole Sakata homeland measures about 225 kms and the width distance 
between the Kasai River and Lukenie Rivers measures approximately 80 kms ( Nkiere 
1984:31; see also Bylin 1966:  31, 37-46; Denis 1935:481 ). A glance at the data in Figure 
1.3 below shows that Sakata communities share borders with many Bantu -speaking ethnic 
groups, namely the Boma, Sengele, Ntomba, Nkundo -Mbelo and Nkundo -Mbindjankama 
in the north, and with the Nkundo -Ipanga in the east, as well as with the Yanzi in the south 
(on the left side of the Kasai River).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
3 From the socio-cultural anthropologist and social archeologist’s standpoint , it is interesting to note in the 
words of Patton (2014:89) that, like the Australian Aboriginal people, so too the Sakata’s utilization of their 
landscape (lake, rivers  and land) is “mediated by long -term patterns of customary tenure and reinforced 
through rituals to maintain and negotiate boundaries and interfaces, and through these interactions, maintain 
individual and group identities”.  
   Figure 1.1 Map of the Democratic Republic of Congo   
showing Mai-Ndombe Province and Bandundu City mentioned in the text  
『人類学研究所 研究論集』第 3 号（2016） 
169 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The vast region exhibits a tropical semi -humid climate, with heavy rainfall. The 
vegetation is mostly savannah covered plateaus which are naturally cut by streams, springs, 
rivers and Lake Mai-Ndombe (120 kms long and as much as 50 k ms wide at one point ), as 
well as  by pockets of t hick and gallery forest every 20 to 50 meters , all along the 
Figure 1.2 Map of the Kutu District showing Sakata Corporate Land and surrounding regions  
          
 
Figure 1.3 Ethnic Groups i n Central Congo Basin  
 Source: De Saint Moulin  2003:108 (Carte 3, fig. 6) 
Research Papers of the Anthropological Institute Vol.3 (2016) 
170 
 
waterways. There is a further consideration: “ In the north –eastern parts of the region can 
you also find the big National Park of Salongo. Oil has been found near the big lake (Lake 
Mai-Ndombe) some twenty  years ago but no one has  bothered to pursue this for many 
years, because of the collapsed infrastructure and problems involved in operating a 
company there ” (Eriksson 2006 :22). The huge river system h as historically served as a 
primary means of transportation, and thus also of cultural diffusion and influence. The 
main means of transport ation for the Sakata people are ferries, planes, and dug out canoes. 
Lack of jobs  and better means of transportation i s the most often cited barrier to 
employment among the Sakata living in rural areas. Equally the lack of road 
communication resulted to the isolation of the area from the rest of the country for a long 
time. Sakata populations living in urban areas  continue the ir ethno-historic linkages and 
attachments to the area.  
 
1.2 History 
The following is a brief historical sketch of Sakata society. Note at the outset that I will 
not be interested in the past for its own sake, but only as it throws light on the prese nt 
structures and social life of the Sakata.  
 
1.2.1 Migration and Settlement  
There is scarcely any scholarly material about the origins of the  Sakata. The attempt to 
conduct systematic research in this specific area is a far from straightforward task . This is 
partly because the absence of early historical and archeological records makes it difficult to 
be definite about the ir pre-colonial society 4. However, by comparing fragmentary oral 
evidence preserved through generations with the empirical and linguisti c evidence so far 
available, ethnographers and historians have recently attempted to piece together the 
narrative of historical trajectories , early and late material, social and ideological processes  
of the Sakata in the region.  
The intriguing question of  when, how and why the early Sakata groups migrated to the 
region of Lowe r Kasai has prompted considerable debate (Tonnoir 1970; Cornevin 1963; 
Bompere 1958; Denis 1954; see also Van Everbroecker 1961; Focquet -Van Kerken 1924  
quoted by Nkiere 1984:26 ), and not all research points convincingly into the same direction. 
However, the orthodox view, to the best of my knowledge, is that early S akata groups 
probably migrated into their present homeland ( Kutu District) around the ninth and tenth  
centuries (or even earlier) from the northwestern corner of  present-day Cameroon and 
southern Nigeria (Tonnoir 1970:57; see also Cornevin 1963:27 -28, hypothesis based on the 
1957, 1958 and 1959 Carbon 14 dat ed by Naquin and J. Hiernaux).  They are said to have 
                                                   
4 This observation is not surpr ising, partly because of the following widely acknowledged reason: “The  
study of history came late to Central Africa but is now developing  rapidly. In the pre -colonial period it asks 
new questions about each facet of population growth, each economic innova tion, each interface between the 
inner world and the outer world, each evolution of religious perception, each new mastery of political skills, 
each realignment of kinship networks” (Birmingham 1981:vii).  
『人類学研究所 研究論集』第 3 号（2016） 
171 
 
left those part s of Africa before the arrival of Europeans by crossing the Ubangi River. It 
might seem peculiar that this migration took place in different groups and periods (Figure 
2).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Oral tradition that I recorded in 2003 from specialist informants and elders of the Sakata, 
for example,  suggests that  the ancesto rs of the Sakata migrated in l arge number s in the 
middle of the second century. Overpopulation, draught and famine in their ori ginal locality 
could have been incentives of their migration into the Central African Republic, where they 
were called “ Basar”, a descriptive appellation meaning “people from the Sahara desert”.  
From there they moved to Congo -Brazzaville, crossing the Congo River embark ing on the 
coast at the p resent-day Bolobo villa ge. Even though the land appeared unoccupied, they 
decided not to settle, but rather to continue the journey until they reached the coast of the 
present-day Mushie District, where the Mfimi River joins the Kasai River. At this stage, the 
large community of  the Sakata split into two groups. The small group , which was afraid to 
continue the long journey , settled at the wells, and was then called Baboma of the north by 
others who saw themselves as courageous. The word ‘Boma” means “fear, afraid” in 
Kikongo lan guage, and literally Baboma (plural of “Boma”) would mean fearful people. 
Members of  the large group then continued the journey until they reached the wells of 
Biboko, an I sland that separates the Kasai and Mfimi Rivers. Later the remaining 
community of Bi boko split again into two groups. The small  group migrated towards the 
right bank of the Kasai River, where it connects with the Kwango and Kwilu Rivers, and 
finally settled in the Ombali village , on the opposite side from Bandundu city. This group 
was the n called Baboma of the south. The large group that remained in Biboko land 
Figure 2 Map of Presumed migrations in 9 th, 11th and 12th centuries 
Source: Tonnoir 1970:44 
Research Papers of the Anthropological Institute Vol.3 (2016) 
172 
 
occupied both the left coast of the Kasai River from Biboko to Dungu land (where the 
Sakata share borders with the Nkundo of the Kasai River), and  the right coast of the M fimi 
River, as well as the land along the Lukenie River, where the Sakata share borders with the 
Nkundo of the Mai -Ndombe Lake. Of great interest to this narrative  on the  earliest 
ancestors of the Sakata is the peculiar fact that their occupation of the Kimbali-Mayi land is 
attested to by the “great baobab tree” ( biboko), in an excellent state of preservation  today. 
Not much is known about the distribution of the earliest for ebears of the Sakata in the 
Kutu region. Nkiere (1984:30)’s evidence , however,  indicates that they would have  
probably settled first in the present-day Lemvia-Sud (Mbanzankwi) chiefdom.  
 
 According to testimonies gleaned from  my informan ts, the ancestors of the 
Sakata would have immigrated by clan groups. On their arrival in the region they 
currently occupy, each clan settled in unoccupied territory. It was in the 
present-day Lemvia-Sud (Mbanzankwi) chiefdom that these pioneers initially 
settled b efore experiencing a gradual dispersion due mainly to overpopulation . 
The rest of the country, in part icular, the present-day Mabie chiefdom, was still 
uninhabited and was part of the two Lemvia  [Lemvia-Nord and Lemvia -Sud] 
chiefdoms which at the time formed a single whole entity starting from Lukenie to 
Kasai Rivers. (My translation from the original French). 
 
  Already from their earliest for ebears the Sakata had inherited a history of domination 
and power. Under the pressures of overpopulation, for instance, it is reportedly that the 
Sakata had usurped some neighboring ethnic groups  and conquered their l ands, leading to a 
social crisis. Nkiere (1984:30) aptly observes: 
 
The dispersion of the clans throughout the country was not made without a blow 
here and there. There was sometimes a  tradition of conquest. The best-known case 
concerns the country’ s easte rn region. A conflict between members of the same 
clan among the Bate re [sub-group of the Sakata] pushed one of the members, the 
chief Mukamata, to cross the Kasai River and forcefully settle in Bagata territory. 
As a c onqueror, he organized several clashe s in Yanzi country and hence spread 
panic [and desolation in the area] . To make peace the Yanzi of the region had, by 
customary treaty, to give portions of land  to the chief Mukamata. In addition, the 
sister of the Yanzi chief of the region was also given in marriage to the chief 
Mukamata. This union therefore cemented the ties between the two sides, 
fostering peaceful coexistence  [in this specific region] . (My t ranslation form the 
original French). 
 
This becomes telling because one major finding of our pre vious study (Munsi 2008) is 
that many chiefs engendered antagonism in their own communities by unscrupulously 
『人類学研究所 研究論集』第 3 号（2016） 
173 
 
seizing upon their new-found authority as an opportunity for defrauding their people. Those 
conflicts affected the population rate and were one of  the incentives for the practice of 
‘secret societies’, sorcery and witchcraft as means of defense and protection of the families, 
lineages and clans, as well as the village communities and chiefdoms. One thing seems 
certain: If any organization existed in  pre-colonial Sakata society, it was rather within the 
framework of customs which had been institutionalized over the centuries at the level of 
village communities, matrilineal lineages and clans , which I  discuss further below . Since 
their settlement in  Kutu territory, Sakata communities have been commonly known for  iron 
arms and tools technology, arts of pottery and weaving, folkloric dance , and traditional 
medicine and health . 5  The study by (Bekaert 2000) offers probably the most 
comprehensive empirical a nalysis of the latter theme . 
 
1.2.2 Exploration and Colonial Periods  
The encounter between the Sakata European navigators, explorers, conquerors, colonizers, 
merchants and missionarie s had reportedly a two -fold aspect:  immediate and practical . At 
both leve ls, much evidence indicates that conquest, colonization and trade led to modes of 
domination or coexistence and multi -faceted trans -cultural relationships.  The following is a 
glowing review of it.   From 1874 to 1884 , during his third trip to Africa  in the service of 
King Leopold II of Belgium , Welsh-born journalist I. Henry Morton Stanley  opened the 
Congo River Basin and laid the groundwork for the Congo Free State , largely by persuading 
local chiefs to grant sovereignty  over their land to the King Leopold II (1835 -1909) of 
Belgium, after setting up 21 trading posts along the river.  During the Berlin West Africa 
Conference—but not the Conference as such  (1884-5)—convoked by the German chancellor 
Otto von Bismarck , the participants, representing fourteen Euro pean states and the United 
States of America , agreed to recognize King Leopold II  of Belgium, as the sovereign of a 
“Congo Free State” (CFS ) or Etat Indépendant du Congo  (AIC). As a result, his government 
began a move to "imprint a Belgian character upon C hristian missionary work in the Congo ” 
(Reardon 1968: 85;86)  That character was Belgian Catholic, the religion of their 
motherland, which was also a state supported church.  
The first extended contact of the Sakata with Western culture took place  between 1 882 
and 1888 when Henry Morton Stanley explored the Mai -Ndombe region, followed by Kund, 
Tappendeck and A.Delcommune ( see Van der Kerken 1941:476; Van Everbroeck 1961:49 , 
quoted by Nkiere 1984:148 ). These explorers have reportedly gathered the most 
ethnographic history to date. Their studies included that of the social, political, economic, 
and religious aspects of the Sakata culture.  
                                                   
5 In the light of Maes’ empirical evidence (1930:88 -90; 100-1), Rowlands (1973 :594) for example, recorded 
that the Sakata metalsmiths in Congo are hierarchically ranked on the basis of the metalwork they can produce. 
Thus “the production of parade objects and insignia could only be done by the master -smith who also 
happened to be the village chief” .   
 
Research Papers of the Anthropological Institute Vol.3 (2016) 
174 
 
There is a further aspect. Between 1885 and 1895 the Sakata territory was also attached to 
the District of Kasai, which the n included a portion of Katanga, Kasai, the wh ole Leopold II 
Lake, and the who le Kwango  region. In August 1895, however, the Sakata were detached 
from the Kasai District to be incorporated into Leopold II District, with the Centre Kutu as 
the administrativ e capital. On 9 August 1895, a l arge portion of the Sakata homeland fell 
under the patronage of the King Leopold II, in what was variously called either “ le domaine 
de la couronne” , or “the crown domain”, which covered a total area of approximately 
250,000 square kilometer  (Barbara 1988:259). It is surmised that t he colonial powers’ main 
source of income was the exploitation of rich rubber plantations and ivory resources (Anstey 
1966:1-3; see also Greinker, Lubkemann & Steiner 2010:425 ), as well as copper a nd gold in 
the Congo. Consequently, Sakata populations were subjected to horrible atrocities during 
this time. Hands were cut off, people were whipped, and kidnapped, held hostage and many 
other cruelties were committed in Leopold’s search for ivory and ru bber (For further details, 
see Hochschild 1998) . In concrete terms  this means that “[from] 1885 to 1908―the crucial 
years during which the Congo was opened up to European exploration and 
settlement―Leopold controlled its destinies.  The S overeign—who never set foot in his 
African kingdom —was very largely responsible for the way in which relations between 
Europeans and Africans developed there ” (Slade 1962: iii). It should be noted in passing that 
European (especially Belgian)  presence signified forced labor and relocation, but also 
availability of manufactured goods, services like health and education, and the introduction 
of cash economy. 
1906 brought some structural changes to the Sakata homeland. Notable among them are 
the shift of the administrative centre from Malepie (present -day Kutu) to Inongo , the 
administrative headquarter of present-day Mai-Ndombe Province. T he pre-existing seven 
large chiefdoms of the Sakata were officially recognized and integrated into the colonial 
administration by Belgian colon ial authorities . With minor exceptions, the Belgian 
administration came to control the entire Sakata society  through it s prominent  chiefs, 
leaving the internal organization of the society intact. These changes took place under the 
‘colonial policy’ that wa s generally ‘paternalistic’ in tone and ‘indirect’ in administration. 6 
Local chiefs were used as pawns of the government; often they were removed from power 
if rumored to be anti -colonialist. Belgian colonial authorities played the role of tutor among 
local populations and controlled them through local traditional institutions. To reduce the 
power of the regional ethnic groups, the latter were all incorporated into a unified 
administrative system (Nkasa 2005; for historical review, see Fabian 2001).  Even th ough 
the extreme violence of the state, which the Belgian monarch Leopold II held as his private 
property, led to a huge international scandal and obliged the Belgian parliament to annex it 
in 1908, it is assumed that t his pre-independence Belgian rubber r egime lasted until 1933 
(Anstey 1966:67).  Even now , the majority of l ong-time residents interviewed still 
                                                   
6 It might seem peculiar that the Belgian colonial administration affected local leadership by sometimes 
changing chiefs based on their willingness or lack of willingness, to collaborate with Belgian administ rators. 
『人類学研究所 研究論集』第 3 号（2016） 
175 
 
remember those Belgian colonial atrocities.  
Since the middle of the nineteenth century Christianity has been adopted by large 
segments of the rural Sakata population (Mputu 1999 among others). Major life transitions 
(such as birth, puberty, and death) were marked by religious ceremonies, many of which 
combined Christian and ancestral traditions. Thus far, many contemporary ethnographers, 
especially Congolese professor Nkiere (1984) −whose work features prominently in this 
paper−have argued that the spread of Christianity and urbanization, and urban development 
(as a result of the period of state hegemony and modernization) , have, in many ways, 
changed some religious perception s and a ttitudes of the Sakata. This reflects the 
acknowledgement that  “[no] religious world can remain the same forever and in response to 
this traditions undergo transformation processes, answering to the needs of the community ; 
new places, roles and powers gain  recognition whilst old places, roles and powers gain new 
meanings” (Lawson 1984:9).  
But the positive aspects of Christian (mostly Catholic) mission apply only to certain 
subjects, or in certain contexts. In other places, we are told that the misinterpretation of the 
Bible and Christian  teaching instead led some ministers to destroy precious things such as 
statues that embodied the cultural heritage  of the Sakata. It is reported for example that in  a 
moment of desperation , a Sakata chief decided to give one precious statue to a vendor. 
Interestingly, t his statue , which held within it the energy to support women in the birth 
process, was later displayed at the Cultural Surviving Bazaar held at the Prudential  Center 
mall in Boston in 2009 . A note was stuck to the statu e with tape, written in red magic 
marker and read: “Congo, the last Sakata mask (original) 100 years old”  (Figure 3) , 
suggesting that all of the other remaining statues had been thrown into a fire by the Sakat a 
in the insistence of a Roman C atholic missionary priest. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.2.3. Some Structural Changes in Post Independent Period  
It is reported that t he integrity of the existing seven chiefdoms in Sakata society has 
Figure 3 The probable last surviving Statue in a Sakata Village 
Photo by Cultural Surviv al organization, 19 Dec.2009  
Research Papers of the Anthropological Institute Vol.3 (2016) 
176 
 
continued to be preserved in the  region since the creation of the Leopol d II District 
(present-day Mai-Ndombe District) in 1960 and the reunification of the Dia and the Sakata 
in Kutu territory (p resent-day Kutu District) and later the attachment of the whole Leopold 
II District to the Province of Bandundu (p resent-day Kwilu P rovince) in 1970 (For further 
details, see Mouvements géographiques  1885:7732;1910:30 & 1913 -1914: 4; Profils du 
Zaire 1972:102-112; quoted by Nkiere 1984: 148 -149).  
Throughout the 1970s, the whole of Sakata society experienced changes brought about 
by the reorganization of provinces and districts, which resulted in the incorporation of the 
paramount chiefs into the structure of the wider Congolese administrative system.  In a 
sense, a Sakata chief became the principal agent between his chiefdom or village 
community and the colonial authorities. In this contex t, however, it must be noted that 
Sakata society  had to cope with all these external pressures without losing its internal 
autonomy. It can thus be submitted here that t he great strength and tenacity of  the 
socio-political and religious systems of the Sakata have remained evident throughout these 
stages of their historical development (see especially Bompere 1998; Nkiere 1984; Mave 
1975). Viewed from the public domain, it  is ironical that they have been displaying a kind 
of ‘cultural conservatism’ , which should always  be regarded as a good thing, rather than as 
liable to hinder the assimilation of their matrilineal society into the Congolese national 
society. 
 
1.4 Population Growth (1970 -2012) 
Sakata com munities are mainly concentrated in the Kutu District, where they represent 
the majority of the population. However, Sakata individuals and f amilies also have a 
substantial presence in various parts  of the Congo  and of the world , where the ir numbers 
have reportedly spiked in recent years . The 1970 census indicated that about 92.900 Sakata 
people lived in the region, while in 1972 the number rose to 144,718. The 1981 census 
estimated the number at 140 ,130 out of a regional population of about 209,513 (Monse 
1987:10); in 2003 , according to the Interior Provincial Division of Bandundu,  the figure 
was 200,000  out of the total population of 450,930 . Since the mid -1980’s, however, the 
Sakata population has been increasing, with an average population density of abo ut 5 ,16 
persons per square kilometer  (Nkiere 1984:34). This increase was due to a slight increase in 
the birth rate combined with a small decline in the death rate. Estimates range upward from 
207,000 (see People Groups Organization 2016) . The true figure of the core Sakata group’s 
population is probably 300,000 Sakata individuals, excluding those who have permanently 
settled in urban areas.  
Despite this,  reliable figures for the total number of the Sakata  are still unavailable. In 
2012 the population of K utu District was estimated at 405,796 out of 1,500,000 inhabitants 
found in the present -day Mai-Ndombe Province. We may estimate (very approximately, in 
the absence of precise censuses) that the re has been a great increase in the Sakata 
population, due to the rapid increase in the regional population in recent year s. In passing, 
『人類学研究所 研究論集』第 3 号（2016） 
177 
 
it should be noted that migration plays a part in population fluctuations. Experience shows 
that increase d permanent or seasonal migration to cities or urban areas accompanied the 
country’s economic development during the 1980’s, but there is also significant migration 
between rural areas as people leave their places for more productive work or farm 
opportunities. 
 
 1.5 Linguistic Classification 
The Sakata―united in the special type of kinship result ing from the matrilineal descent 
system―speak Kisakata  (Kesakata or Keshaa), a Bantu language that the Turveren School 
(1867) classified into the category of B/B34 Zone languages within the phylum of the 
Niger-Congo family, whose varying degree s of similarity and dissimilarity ha ve long been 
recognized.7 Knowledge of the spoken and written language of the Sakata  is nevertheless 
scant, due to the small number of systematic studies. Given the size of the population and 
the territorial range of the Sakata, there is much dialectical variation in their language  (i.e. 
waria, kebai, mokan, kengengei, kitere and kintuntulu), to the point that some dialects are 
barely intelligible mutually  (Monse 1987; De Witte 1 955). However, in education, 
government, trade (including expatriate business) , and evangelization Lingala  (one of the 
four national language s) and French  (the official language) are  preferred as a tool of 
communication. Practically, the Sakata residents o f Bandundu city are also well acquainted 
with Kikongo (a national language ). In practice of course, Lingala appears to function as  a 
crucial element in local communities’ political and economic development and ultimate 
regional integration.  
 
1.6 Subsistence and Economic Activities 
The Sakata, whom some ethnographers have accurately identified as hard workers and 
who value self -sufficiency, live in an area which is, by Sub -Saharan African standards, 
densely populated and agriculturally productive.  For livelihood, they rely mainly on stable, 
ecologically sound, and efficient slash-and-burn type of shifting cultivation and a mix of 
fishing. Men are primarily involved in 4 to 6 months fishing expeditions, but heavy 
agricultural labor such as logging  and cleaning fields also fall to them. Women are engaged 
almost exclusively in subsistence agriculture . Put di fferently, t hey are  major agricultural 
producers. They farm the land above water -levels and hoe the weeds, but both genders do 
the harvesting together . The m ain food crops (old and new) include  cassava the (main 
staple food since the nineteenth century ), corn (maize), sweet potatoes, yams, beans, root 
                                                   
7 The linguistic foundations of Bantu migrations are discussed in two chapters in Collins, Problems in 
African History: Joseph Greenberg, “ The languages of Africa,’’ 78 -85, and Thomas Spear, ‘‘Bantu 
migrations,’’ 95 -98. Vansina’s evidence (1995) is also of greatest interest . More recently, however, it is 
reportedly that on account of the “lack of ancient written records, historical -comparative linguistics has 
grown to be an important way of accessing the early history of Africa. Within the realm of Bantu studies, 
ongoing internal classifications of the Bantu languages have not only led to changing hypotheses on their 
evolution and dispersion, but these linguistic theories have also incited and oriented archaeological and 
cultural historical research in this field of study ” (Bostoen 2006:1)  
Research Papers of the Anthropological Institute Vol.3 (2016) 
178 
 
crops, groundnuts and plantains, peanuts and other grain legumes , oil palm nuts, and rice. 8 
Other crops incl ude coffee, fibers, rubber, vegetable crops , or wild fruits, hunting and 
domesticated livestock (ducks, chicken, sheep, goats and cows) . Beside their contacts with 
Bobangi traders, the Sakata have increasingly been involved in  a symbiotic network of 
regional exchanges and the high degree of specialization in fishing and commercial 
exchanges.  
 
2. Socio-Political Organization   
 
In thi s section I shall bring together  material information gleaned from a variety of 
sources to  determine how t he i nfluence of Kinship determinants in Sakata society is 
particularly reflected  in the patterns of village settlement s and in the socio-political 
structures, and why . In so doing, I shall a lso identify key features of how their dynamic 
interplay is construed , attempting a holi stic account of Sakata society  with its inst itutions. 
For analytical purposes, I shall deal separately with the  social and  the political while 
bearing in mind that the social and political systems develop asynchronously . I draw 
inspiration from a  descent t heory that follows Radcliffe -Brown’s formulation and deals 
with actual relations between persons and lineages  (Schneider 1965 ), and  Bondarenko 
(2013; 2006).  
 
2.1 Social Organization 
My primary attempt here is to hi ghlight the function of the kinship system of the Sakata 
in relation to  their living arrangements, social clas ses and  political structure, as well as 
norms and behavior s in different circumstances . Understanding the intricacies of their  
patterns of social structuring is “significant from a materi alistic perspective because they 
reflect a society’s adaptations to its social and material environments ” (Keegan 
&Maclachlan 1989:618). 
 
2.1.1 Living Arrangements                                                 
The rural settlement of the Sakata is in vil lages (officially referred to as localities ) 
                                                   
8 Cassava (manioc), the most prevalent crop in the region, is classified among many other crops that were 
introduced by the Portuguese from the Western Hemisphere, while rice was introduced from the East coast of 
Africa by the Afro -Arabs in the nineteenth century (Meditz and Merrill 1993). Originally the “agriculture of 
the Lower Kasai was reportedly founded on sorghum and bananas, but ese were gradually being 
supplemented or replaced by maize, and later by cassava, which became the staple food by the nineteenth 
century…Although it is clear that crops, agricultural techniques, currencies and material goods spread from 
the west into the Lower Kasai area, it is not clear by what means these influences spread, or at what  periods. 
There is also much uncertainty about the social, political, linguistic and demographic changes which may be 
ascribed to the influence of western neighbours” (Birmingham 1981:88). Due to  its ease and convenience,   
manioc cultivation would have ex tended along much of the Mfimi, Lukenie and Kasai Rivers and must have 
been easily accessible to most of the popul ation.  
 
 
『人類学研究所 研究論集』第 3 号（2016） 
179 
 
generally fairly large in size , composed of fifty to a hundred rectangular wa ttle-and-daub 
houses. The village infrastructure includes churches and in some case s meeting areas for 
social activities and for the l ocal chef de terre (land chief), a dispensary, and a school. Each 
village (uleba or lebenge ) is traditionally headed  by a local chief or chef de terre  (Mbe ne 
kyum, Ndza uleb ) issuing from the landowner matrilineal descent group ( Bambe). 
Individual h ouseholds are not interspersed evenly, but in clusters of  closely kin-related 
compounds (sprawling structures).  The practice of exogamous marriage serves to create an 
overlap between residence and kin. 9  Inter-clan and inte r-chiefdom marriage was 
encouraged. Post-marital residence is  virilocal. A Musakata wife moves to her husband’s  
village. She uses land that belongs to her husband’s matrilineage and that will be inherited 
by his sister’s children. Thus her children do not automatically contribute to the strength  of 
the household, as they have their own interests to protect in their mother ’s brother’s village. 
Although the virilocal residence naturally forces brothers and sisters to live separately, it is 
assumed that male and female members are necessary for the normal working of Sakata 
society. For this reason, there is always social activity devoted to overcoming the difficulty 
of the spatial separation inherent in the system.  
From the structural point of view, t here are two main axes upon which the cluster is 
internally created. The first is the parent -child relationship, which is a vertical  axis. It is 
about continuity, in the form of developmental cycles and access to land for building 
houses. In practice of course,  the relations between the father and childre n are  carefully 
cultivated in individual Sakata families . As Schatzberg (1998:83) has commented:  
 
 For the matrilineal Sakata, the most crucial relations within the basic family are tho se 
between father and children. Compared to the maternal uncle, the Mus akata father 
incarnates understanding, tenderness, and comprehension. The cash economy and 
spread of capitalist values and modes of production has accentuated the fundamental 
importance and influence of the father.  
 
The point for consideration is that  the father of the family has a definite role to play in the 
household affairs. However, according to the matrilineal kinship principles, his role is 
limited by the final word of the maternal uncle (pipi or Ngonshi) who holds more power in a 
given individual S akata lineage . Thus, we could argue that the maternal uncle is the 
sustainer of their social, economic and legal interests.  
The second aspect to be considered in this social interaction is the sibling set, which is a 
horizontal axis. It is primarily about  cohesion, keeping things together, either through 
co-residence or affinity. Actually b oth of these axes are equally important, but they have 
                                                   
9 “Exogamous (substantive exogamy) “means marrying outside,” and implies that marriage is forbidden 
within a specified group , usually though not necessarily a clan… A clan is usually a named group of people 
who believe themselves from a common ancestor in the remote past. Members of the same clan usually have 
special obligations toward one another” (Beattie 2002:1).  
Research Papers of the Anthropological Institute Vol.3 (2016) 
180 
 
different roles in social organization and therefore are not opposed to each other.  What this 
translates into is the observation that kinship and family continue to exist as the foundation 
of economic, social and reproductive behavior in the Sakata homeland, though the situation 
of urban areas indicates  now the increasing importance of the nuclear family as an economi c, 
residential, and psychological unity.  
Why is this residence pattern still exactly and finely maintained? What does this signify to 
present-day Sakata individuals? Conceivably, t his notion of physical proximity of 
kin-groups and family networks of shari ng and reciprocity is essential to the psychological 
proximity required for stabilizing family units with in the wider descent groups  and 
maintaining at the same time people’s closeness and their relations to the Sakata hereditary 
chiefs. If anything, the  following points understate the case. Most notably, t he house of the 
village headman ( Mbe ne ky um, Ndza uleb), for example,  is purposely located at the centre 
of the village, in order to assure the unity of individual households through his political, 
socio-juridical, economic and religious authority. Nearby are lined up the houses of his 
married children and nephews who  claim a common founding ancestor ( Ngalela). T his 
matrilineal ancestor occupied a higher position among many other ancestors ( Bale e dzia ) 
who also lived on eart h and have already crossed what is e voked in Sakata myths as the 
‘river of life’.  
Equally important is the fact that t he house of the traditional political chief ( Mudju) is 
placed at the entrance of the village . And it turns out that there are a number of intriguing 
reasons for this specific location. One of the most important of these is the emphasis on the 
mystical security or protection of  the village population s and their lands.  This suggests that 
political and religious leadership  among the Sakata consists of a series of features that are 
causally interconnected.  One further example should suffice. Close by the house of the 
traditional political chief ( Mudju) is found the ‘palaver tree’ ( nshima). More usually, i t is a 
place where f amily and village issues are discussed and resolution of conflicts takes place.  
Traditionally the Sakata have subscribed to the belief that this important ‘palaver tree’ was 
secretly planted in the village by former matrilineal religious priests through a series of rites 
called ‘Placing the first stone to protect the village’ (eteka nshima n’uleba) performed before 
settlement. Evidence is still inc omplete as to when exactly this tree was planted . All we 
know is that  during those secret religious ceremonies, they also buried  two ceramic vessels 
endowed with spiritual powers with a twofold aim: f irst, to be in conformity with the will of 
the deities in the area, and second to protect the population from any misfortune ( usa) sent 
by witches. This specific tree has therefore its practical aspect. Its sacredness justifies  the 
strict prohibition against cutting it down.  
My sense from the field is that  the strict norms of Sakata kinship regarding authority and 
inter-generational relationship continually play an impo rtant part in maintaining the identity 
and cohesion of residential groups.  In addition , there is also a  simple realiz ation, given 
people’s mobility  and the migration to urban areas, that the influential role  played by  the 
matrilineal kinship system even ex tends beyond village  communities, whether through 
『人類学研究所 研究論集』第 3 号（2016） 
181 
 
marriages with other lineages or with kinsmen distantly related.  An interpretation of the 
facts gleaned in Bandundu city, for example, reveals that m any Sakata v irtually live  in a 
close-knit community and they look out for one another . A common thread linking these 
kinship networks is the deep-felt requirement to engage in social interaction with people of 
common cultural history and identity . The Sakata  encourage their members to maintain 
traditional practices of obligation and reciprocity in a new environment . This set in motion a 
reciprocal, feedback relationship between Sakata migrants to Bandundu city and their circle 
of relatives in the new location.  
  Although the experience of the Sakata found in Bandundu city is not quantitatively 
typical, it is nonetheless characteristic. My sense from the field is that t he Sakata extended 
families tend to nurture the virtues of extended kinship obligations, generosity, cooperation 
and hospitality. This reality also  becomes clear when kinship distance is evaluated v ertically 
and laterally or horizontally. G enerational distance affects both intensity and mode 
(behavior) of social interaction. Laterally or horizontally, affinity induces extra distance, 
also both in the  intensity and mode of interactio n (avoidance of behavior). This finding 
purports to say  how cultural background has a strong effect on Sakata migrants’ likely 
choice of adaptive strategy in the new setting.  This should not be surprising. I t is widely 
acknowledged in many societies that social behavior, ritual occurrence, and legal action are 
for a large part governed by a tacit evaluation of kinship distance.  One note, h owever, must 
be made here. W hile extended family networks remain extremely important in  the 
maintenance of ethnic identity among Sakata  residents of Bandundu city, non -kin networks 
developed through neighborhood community centers have also taken on a new role of 
increasing prominence.  
Of greatest interest to us is the observation that some Sakata individuals living in urban 
settings are often engaged in circular migration from rural to urban and back again. Sakata 
individuals’ interrelationship and their degree of cultural emphasis on kinship  in a new 
environment might have  facilitated the implantation of modern values in to rural areas  and 
the importation of traditional concepts (i.e. kinship ties , religious beliefs and practices  and 
cultural celebrations) into urban areas  by Sakata migra nts. The impression that emerges is 
that the i nteractions among the Sakata residents of Bandundu city involve various kinds of 
knowledge sharing, the establishment of kinship networks and religious and cultural 
transmissions. It is evident that some of these Sakata migrants have been engaged in the web 
of rela tions and practices within urban institutions of development cooperation. By 
contrasting the results, we see that  the kinship networks that have been  transplanted to the 
urban areas  apparently do not differ from the traditional rural networks . Conducting e ven 
limited studies would, however, satisfy the intellectual needs of anthropologists.  The next 
step is to describe the matrilineal lineages and clans which represent the binding forces of 
Sakata society.  
 
 
Research Papers of the Anthropological Institute Vol.3 (2016) 
182 
 
2.1.2 Matrilineal Lineages and Clans  
   The Sakata are organized into a number of structurally similar and functionally 
equivalent family segments which traditionally follow matrilineal descent patterns . These 
surviving segments are called lineages —localized communities composed of extended 
families, wh ose members trace descent to a known ancestor. These unilineal lineages thus 
constitute exogamous units, with distinctive facial marks, food taboos , and sets of names : 
minimal lineages (mpare); major lineages (ipfune) and ma ximal lineages ( mapfune, also 
referred as  kenkare). The lineages themselves are chara cterized by their being represented 
by certain members who are specifically related by their social and religious positions to the 
matrilineal figure from which the lineage descended  (Nkiere 1984:46 -48). Thus identity in 
the life of the Sakata  is constructed in large measure through a concern for lineages. As 
corporate units in economic, political , jur idical and religious respects , Sakata matrilineage 
lineages join together to form clans ( kenkare), that i s, a totem and exogamous community 
whose members are not allowed to intermarr y. These matrilineal clans include all the closely 
related people in a particular subsistence village community and historical antecedents . 
Analysis has shown that members of a si ngle Sakata de scent group still maintain a high 
sense of communi ty and a high level of solidarity, which are expressed through kinship 
terms, sharing practices, and a constant concern for one another’ s welfare. 
It is important to note that these matrilineage lineages and clans are communities of  both 
the living and the dead. The clan category is more appropriate than ethnicity in analysing the 
Sakata kinship system.  The essential point here is that the matrilineal clans  represent 
functional units. They are social entities in which individuals practically disappear in the 
midst of collectivity. Thus viewed, they constitute social or even socio -political units 
perfectly defined and customarily immutable , and hence continue to exist as ‘ the 
cornerstone of the t otal traditional fabric ’, fostering and sustaining  Sakata communities  
linked by a shared culture and spiritual values . There are therefore clear indications that  the 
matrilineal lineages and clans continue to be meaningful for the Sakata by reference to th eir 
social functions in relation to certain social practices such as exogamy and incest prohibition.  
Most notably, t he influential role of the Sakata kinship system is seen in the upsurge in 
social stratification discussed below. 
 
2.1.3 Social Stratification  
The entire Sakata society is made up of three major matrilineal clans , which are 
themselves organized into three strata : the high-rank clan (Badju), the landowners ( Bambe) 
who also preside over  matters of land allocation , and commoner kin groups  (Nsane) who 
form the majority. This segmented clan system has been presented as the foundation of 
Sakata society, and to understand Sakata politics, history and even culture, one merely has 
to look at their kinship and clan system.  The interaction between these three strata  is 
intricate. To date, these  Sakata social groupings continue to  serve as the most important 
instrument of social continuity in knitting human relations horizontally and vertically 
『人類学研究所 研究論集』第 3 号（2016） 
183 
 
through generations  to demarcate and discharge social obligati ons with devotion and 
enthusiasm. Their potential impact i s in evidence as societal coordination continue s to be 
largely mediated through the kinship relationship. My understanding of the material thus 
leads me to believe that Sakata kinship constitutes th e major bond for maintaining human 
relations between the aforementioned three social classes and for regulating ownership 
even in changing environment s. However, it should be noted in passing that the social 
organization of the Sakata also appears to have functioned simultane ously as an incubator 
of forces of unity and conflicts , and the history of the Mabie chiefdom  reveal valuable 
examples of this kind.  
The above descriptions are of necessity simplified.  In the Sakata lands,  all social 
differences continue to be  institutionalized as hereditary and inviolate, and social status 
finds its expression generally through matrilineal descent.  Other things being equal, age 
requires respect, although seniority does not necessarily confer access to the office of 
highest status in the descent group or in the local community. Males have higher status than 
females in Sakata society, despite the presence of matrilineal descent groups and 
matrilineally based succession and inheritance. Moreover, the supporting material an d 
cultural (including religious) base of local identity is inhibited, and class differentiation 
promoted. More usually, the social differences expressed by variation in Sakata society 
include community membership, residential group differences, occupationa l differences, 
and social ranking. The extent and degree of social inequality expressed by this variation is 
decidedly less certain in the present study and hence requires much further analysis.  It 
merits remarks as well that lineage chieftainship is also an absolute, not a relative matter. 
Therefore, it is imper ative to argue that without the dynamic elements we find in lineages, 
clans and social strata founded on the matrilineal system it would be impossible to explain 
the existence of Sakata society as we know it today.  
 
2.1.4 Gender-Roles Divisions and Father-Children Relationship 
The influential role of the matrilineal kinship system is also crafted from other roles, the 
responsibility of women and men within a specific social milieu defined by specifi c duties. 
On the basis of matrilineal descent, for example, Sakata women are the channels through 
which identity, titles, land rights, and property are acquired. Also understandable in this 
context is the fact that they exercise considerable influence over  the conduct of domestic 
affairs, and even the allocation of use rights to land.  Sakata men typically control the 
political and economic affairs in the public sphere and have ultimate authority over domestic 
decisions ( a role not available to a woman unles s her husband has died or can no longer 
support his family) . However,  evidence is accruing that  shared tasks provide males and 
females with valued roles in Sakata society. The continued existence and vitality of the 
matrilineal kinship ideology among the S akata is also evident in the area of  political 
organization discussed below. 
 
Research Papers of the Anthropological Institute Vol.3 (2016) 
184 
 
2.2. Political Structure 
This theme also recurred throughout the dataset . Here I focus on Sakata society to more 
specifically consider the political system as only one of its int egral parts. I also treat 
political culture as a natural part of Sakata culture  as a whole, as a manifestation of its 
general pattern in the sphere of the political that is embedded in institutions, ideologies, 
legal norms, etc.  In the light of  the viewpoi nts developed by Bondarenko  (2006:67-72), I 
therefore label Sakata society according to its more general, inclusive feature  (the societal 
type; or culture pattern ).  
 
2.2.1 Territorial Divisions  
The Sakata administ er their society on the basis of organiz ed kinship groups through 
social units by a system of decentralization.  The results, as shown in F igure 4  below, 
indicate that the entire Sakata homeland is divided into seven large autonomous chiefdoms  
known as Idju, which have received o fficial recognition since  1906. Traditionally  these 
autonomous chiefdoms are considered as the third level of administrative subdivision, with 
their administrative centres in parentheses listed below:  Mabie (Ndwakombe), Mbamushie 
(Mongobele), Mbantin  (Kempa), Lenvia Nord  (Mbaizakwi), Batere  (Nsobie), Lenvia -Sud 
(Ikoko), and Nduele  (Admin. centre Nselekoko) . It is certainly with the descendants of the 
early occupants of Sakata homeland that the ethnonyms and toponyms of the chiefdom are 
associated. Analysis shows that these kinship-based permanent political entities , the 
framework of which is very old, draw  their spatial and human structure from a logic that is 
clearly one of Sakata identity.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4 Diagrammatic Representation of Political Organization among the Sakata  
Source: Author’s Field notes 2003; 2015  
『人類学研究所 研究論集』第 3 号（2016） 
185 
 
 
More significantly, as can be seen from Figure 4 above, the who le socio -political 
construction’s encompassment of the Sakata is from below, that is from the local 
community level, while the community itself is underpinned by matrilineal kin ties.  The 
synchronic ‘vertical ax is’ of the social organization represents a p urely static aspect of the 
hierarchical order of social entities with all three categories of matrilineage lineages ( mpare 
ipfune, kenkare ) and their leaders ( mfra-maa), village communities ( ibue), each with its 
headman (Mbe ne kyeum), and finally seven ch iefdoms (idju), each with its administrative 
centre. This suggests that each single Sakata Chiefdom ( idju) represents an aggregate of 
social units: lineages, traditional homogeneous village communities (basic units of politic al 
structure) and sub -divisions organized by custom . Each of them is headed by a prominent 
political and sacred chief ( Mudju n’itsui) issuing from the matrilineal line. After investiture, 
he is  usually recognized and inaugurated by the provincial governor. Traditionally the 
Sakata have subscribed to the belief that the traditional political chief ( Mudju) is the 
repository and guardian of the symbols and mysteries of their culture in his chiefdom.  
Equally, when view ed cross-sectionally, it is perhaps  not too fanciful to suggest that 
without relevance to the individual households and village communities that make up the 
socio-political and religious dynamics of a single c hiefdom, the traditional political chief 
(Mudju) is not fully living up to his mission.   
 Moreover, a closely linked assu mption has been that th is political system of the Sakata , 
to a significant degree, displays similarities to that of the Mongo of the northern Congo. A 
possible explanation for this might be that “[the] interaction between the western Mongo 
and the eastern Teke apparently led to the creation of a new system of kingship with a strong 
religious core and hereditary court of secular administrators. This pattern of ‘socialized 
kingship’ seems to have influenced the Boma -Sakata peoples and led to the evolution of a 
more complex political hierarchy than existed south of the Kasai” (Birmingham 1981:89). 
This influence is also manifest in the monosyllabic and consonant terms Kp and gb found in 
the Kisakata language (Tonnoir 1970).  All we can claim with some certainty is that the 
earliest ancestors of the present Bantu speakers in the hinterland of the Congo were 
preceded by the Pygmy inhabitants. 
Defined as radically, politically, vertically and decentralized  autonomous unit, a single 
Sakata chiefdom (idju) therefore conducts its own social and religious activities. Moreover, 
it carries on local welfare work among the cluster of villages or hamlets (which are made 
up of several families and lineages) and provides a meeting place for social functions. In 
practice, of cou rse, it has its own functionaries (hierarchy of chiefs), whose duties, 
responsibilities, and rights have been formally allocated.  The powers and prerogatives of 
these Sakata officials are defined by the customary law . This suggests  that, for Sakata 
households and individuals interviewed, kinship is not only ideology but also the real 
socio-political background. I ndeed the very existence and prosperity of the populace is 
believed to be guaranteed by the presence of the chiefdom  (Idju) headed by a sacralized 
Research Papers of the Anthropological Institute Vol.3 (2016) 
186 
 
ruler titled Mudju. It is also noteworthy that the Mudju’s privilege of being vested with 
titular dignity and the tinsel insignia of office  did not prevent his  authority being subject to 
constant interference . This leads us to consider more closely below s ome salient aspects of 
chieftaincy or coordinating structure in Sakata society.  
 
2.2.2 Status and Legitimacy of Chiefs 
The political organization of the Sakata is based on chieftainship which is linked in 
principle, and in fact , to the system of unilineal matrilineal descent groups that provides the 
basic sociopolitical framework of their society. The politically significant matrilineal 
descent groups are those localized in a single village or a cluster of related village  
communities. There are also  clear indications that in all chiefdoms ( Idju)―which continue 
to function more effectively and efficiently in the face of changing conditions―the 
matrilineal kinship system claims to rule through autonomous paramount chiefs  (men and 
women) recruited from the female line. Until more recently, females s ometimes used to 
inherit chiefly positions. During the period of the study, however, most chiefs I met in 
Sakata corporate lands  were men . 10 The fact that the S akata’s matrilineal kinship system 
has male leadership means that the clan or lineage segment wi ll have to have both males and 
females born each generation. Experience of the ruling families in the Mabie Chiefdom 
between 1923 and 1987 has shown that where there is no male in the matrilineage, the role 
of lineage head is not assumed by one of the wome n, but rather, the unit  merges with 
another matrilineage. This is a structural process that needs further investigation in the 
future, espec ially in  light of labor migration, cash cropping and so forth . Specifically, the 
mechanism of power in the Sakata homeland is marked by a striking hierarchy of chiefs  
(men and women) whose secular authority considerably differ s at any level . Let us consider 
now closely the status and legitimacy of these Sakata chiefs.  
 
(i) Traditional Political Chief (Mudju) 
At the apex of the pyramid of traditional authority is the office of the traditional political 
chief ( Mudju n’itsui) selected from the dominant matrilineal clan of Badju and endowed 
with the power  of decision making for a particular chiefdom . He lawfully accomplishes  
several tasks, such as (a) to assure the maintenance of social order by instilling in people the 
duty to observe the customary law; (b) to protect the whole chiefdom from any external 
attack; (c) to strengthen relationships between individual families, ho useholds and lineages 
within the village communities, and between the visible community of the living and the 
invisible community of the ancestors, deities and Supreme Being ( Nzaw). Thus viewed, the 
Sakata consider the traditional political chief ( Mudju) as a visible representative based on 
                                                   
10 In the past, certain eminent women seized the political opportunities afforded by the crumbling of 
male-dominated centres of power . Not only were there women chiefs and counsellors, but common women 
were permitted to take part in discussion. During the period of the study,  however, there was apparently little 
information about newly invested woman chiefs in the Sakata lands . The reasons for this fact, according to key 
informants, were diagnosed as lack of observing the regulations and constraints related to the office secre cy.  
『人類学研究所 研究論集』第 3 号（2016） 
187 
 
the blood relationship between him and the ancestors of the clan. In fact, this link with 
ancestors is symbolized by the stool which the reigning chief occupies. This position as a 
political and spiritual leader both mak es his office a sacred one and let him wield a 
considerable influence upon his local community. Traditionally, Sakata chiefs w ore a red 
uniform as (Figures 5-1 and Figure 5-2). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
However, Sakata history records that some of these chie fdoms were unstable on account 
of several conflicts. This happened as lesser chiefs or persons no t qualified for chieftaincy 
tried to take power from higher ranking chiefs, or when one chief conquered another. In the 
chiefdom of Mabie, for example, I notic ed at least three salient conflicts. The first was the 
conflict between the women chiefs Mudju Boshang and Mudju Mamonie. The second was 
between two men chiefs, Mu dju Mbakala a nd Mudju Iluna. The third conflict occurred 
between the current chief Mudju Keni ne Kenzo (Figure 5-3 & Figure 5 -2) and Mvula Tazu 
(cousin of a chief). Analysis shows clear indications that  all these conflicts affected the 
socio-political and religious organization of the Mabie chiefdom.  
 
 
 
Figure 5-1 A Mudju, Traditional Political Chief  
 in Sakata Society 
Figure 5-2 Two Badju, Traditional Political Chiefs 
 in Sakata Society 
 
 
Research Papers of the Anthropological Institute Vol.3 (2016) 
188 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii)  Land Chief (Mbe) 
Beneath the office of the traditional political chief ( Mudju) is the office of the land chief 
(Mbe ne nkeyun). Lest we overlook the traditional value of the Sakata land chief ( Mbe) and 
the authority he formerly had in the pre-colonial period, it is importan t to note at the outset 
the deep -seated change in traditional political structure in the history of Sakata society. In 
pre-colonial Sakata society , we are told that  only chiefs issu ing from the landowning 
kin-groups (Bambe) had the monopoly to fulfill the basic functions of both the chiefdom and 
the village. This dual role continued virtually unchanged until the colonial era when the 
Belgian territorial administrators replaced the office of the traditional political chief (Mudju 
n’itsui) with that of the land chief ( Mbe) for purposes of control and taxation.  What is 
significant for our analysis, however, is that this major change theoretically created two 
distinct offices in the Sakata homeland.  Interestingly  enough, this separation of powers  still 
continues to be routinely applied today  in the radically altered social and political scene of 
the Congo . Over decades it has been grimly reinforced by the initiative strategies that the 
Congolese State designed in the 1970’s to adapt traditional systems of governa nce to modern 
urban management,  and the political opportunities opened by the changes in Sate policy 
after the 2006 general elections.   
  Yet even in this context, analysis has nevertheless shown that the existing office of the 
land chief ( Mbe) in Sakata society continues to effectively preserve the institutional form of 
land allocation . There is a further aspect. In practice, with hindsight one can see in the 
Sakata homeland that t he relationship between the land chief ( Mbe) and the traditional 
political c hief ( Mudju) is quite intriguing. As Riddell, Salacuse and Tabachnick  correctly 
observe:  
Figure 5-3  Mudju Kevine Kenzo Jean -Pierre 
 Current Traditional Political Chief of Mabie Chiefdom  
Photo by the author, 20 August, 2012 
Figure 5-4 Mudju Kevine Kenzo Jean -Pierre holding 
in his hands a document released by the Congolese 
officials to end up the issue over leadership power 
that occurred in the Mabie Chiefdom  
Photo by the author, 20 August, 2012 
『人類学研究所 研究論集』第 3 号（2016） 
189 
 
“The relation between the land chief s and the political chiefs is an interesting one. 
The political chief Mudju is not a landowner. His entire lineage borrows land from 
a land chief. T his is echoed in the following Sakata proverb: « Mbe oni be leshaon, 
ujuu oni be leban», meaning the authority of Mbe is limited to his village, while that 
of Mudju extends beyond the village.  Each Mudju will have many Mbe in his 
chiefdom, one for each landowning lineage. Historically only two or three of these 
loaned land to the Mudju and his matrikin. ” ( Riddell, Salacuse & Tabachnick 
(1987:43).  
 
It is also important to note that the chef de terre  (Mbe) and elders (notables) are 
recognized locally but not considered part of the State’s administration hierarchy. The 
principal representative of the Congolese government is rather  the local chief or chef de 
localité (Kapita). Almost all the villages have a local chief appointed by the public 
administration. The 2006 Constitution and the Law on Decentralization establish sectors as 
basic territorial entities . However, beyond the village level, and apart from sporadic visits 
from the sector -based authorities, the  presence of the State is almost existent. This is 
unsurprising perhaps, as it  tells us that e ach land chief ( Mbe) is in charge of a territory 
(imve) and traditionally acts as trustee for his or her kinship group.  In this respect, the land 
chief ( Mbe) constitutes the strongest traditional  authority in the village and appears to 
exercise significant influence over local populations through the control of land distribution 
for agriculture and of certain hunting and fishing activities. Additionally, he can , with the 
aid of the native courts, exercises power of adjudication in land disputes and expropriation 
for offences against the community, and regulates internal conflict or issues of immigration 
into the village. Immediately after the land chief ( Mbe) comes the office of the independent 
land chief ( Mbianshu). This is practically an additional structural relationship between land 
chiefs and political ones . This very special kind of land chief (Mbianshu) is the primary 
religious functionary in the society  of the S akata. In other words, his off ice is homologous 
with chieftainship, but oriented towards religious practices, including the funeral rites for 
the traditional political chief  (Mudju).  
 
(iii)  Lesser Kin-Based Offices 
The bottom of the Sakata political structure , finally, includes the less kin-based offices of 
village and lineage heads (men or women) whose villages or lineages lie within the limits 
of the chiefdom. The privileged status of all these hereditary rulers and their religious 
functions are chiefly explained in cosmologic myth and the myths of origins. Through 
conversations with various informants, I gained the impression that the authority of the 
village chiefs over their own people is absolute, and the village is the administrative unit.  
Each lineage is a political unit having  its own head (man or woman) chosen by the adult 
men and women of the matrilineage 
Research Papers of the Anthropological Institute Vol.3 (2016) 
190 
 
The essential feature of the Sakata system is that the  local political chief ( Mudju) has 
supreme authority and power in all executive and administrative matters and is autho rized to 
specify the duties of all subordinate chiefs and officials  selected from the matrilineal line. 
Moreover, all these authority figures, as an integral part of the machinery of administration, 
legally form what becomes the governing body or the counc il of e lders (kebo ke baxime) 
with the mandate to assist the traditional political chief ( Mudju) to rule. The council of 
elders meets on a regular basis in rural villages or towns to discuss topical issues in the 
community and to adjudicate local dispute s, often relating to land use  or ownership . 
Traditional justice mechanisms also exist in virtually every village in the Sakata homeland. 
Informed opinion indicated that the leaders and elders at this level have the longest -standing 
authority in customary mat ters, especially those relating to land. In this respect, the y are 
thought of as being endowed with the power of decision -making for their particular village 
communities regarding social, religious, judiciary and political matters.  For residents of 
isolated areas where a formal court is literally a day away by foot or boat, these councils 
provide a forum for communities to seek redress for property theft, land disputes, and other 
legal-level offenses.  
In specific events, however, the above -mentioned political structure i s supplemented by 
ritual officeholders , including diviners, shamans, herbalists/healers or medicine persons 
commonly called Nga, settlement heads, and even contemporary village presidents  (Kapita) 
whose main role since colonial times has been to represent the political chief ( Mudju) and to 
keep order.  Traditionally the Sakata have subscribed to the belief that all authority figures 
constitute a secret religious society, having specific rites of worship and initiation. Thus 
they are capable of  entering into the visible realm of sorcery and witchcraft. In particular, 
spirit healers are often consulted for herbal remedies that can help people with problems or 
health issues.  There is a further aspect. In all instances Sakata hereditary chiefs may be 
thought of as unifying influences; and whether taken literally or symbolically they represent 
the collective property of the group and add to its cohesiveness and permanence. The 
obligation, indeed the mandate, of Sakata leaders, is primarily to make ce rtain that the 
answers they give in the public sphere stand within the purview and under the auspices of 
ancestors’ overall intentions for the families and communities. This recognition creates 
chances that the Sakata’s religious worldview will find cohere nce and unity in a personal 
relationship with ancestral spirits. These patterns appear to illustrate the degree to which the 
rules and enforcement characteristics of social institutions of the Sakata still remain firmly 
in place, despite social and persona l changes within their spec ific environments . On the 
question of genealogy, and clan segmentation and its relationship with politics, the two most 
significant facts concerning the Sakata are their belief in common ancestry which is at the 
root of their com munity solidarity, and their segmentation into lineage groups which holds 
one of the keys for the understanding of their politics.  
The intriguing realization  is that all Sakata hereditary chiefs  play the role of mediators 
between the living and the dead.  This translate s into the observation  that the matrilineal 
『人類学研究所 研究論集』第 3 号（2016） 
191 
 
kinship system has ‘given rise’ to a kind of priesthood  which is dedicated to preserving the 
cultural values and customs of the Sakata. Thus viewed, it gives and preserves the hereditary 
chiefs’ position in spatial and institutional hierarch ies. For all that, our interviewees told us 
repetitiously that hereditary chiefs ( men and women ) are responsible for a variety of tasks 
including divination, healing, navigation, weather control, and bringing about  propitious 
events such as abundant harvests.  It is therefore possible to argue perfectly validly, albeit 
somewhat simplistically, that frequent  religious practice permeates the culture of Sakata 
communities. This is true whether people are practicing more  localized, folk forms of 
spirituality or are affiliated with Catholic or Protestant Churches, which are strongly 
implanted in the region since the nineteenth century .  
Concretely, our findings have shown that the matrilineal lineage set -up continues to ex ist 
as a strong unif ying factor cementing the society of the Sakata as a whole , and passing on 
the Sakata religious beliefs and values about solidarity with the invisible world of its 
ancestors ( Bale e dzia ). As has become evident in our discussion so far  and will b e 
abundantly clear in the next s ection, the role of the matrilineal kinship ideology is embedded 
in specific social, cultural, and historical contexts, and within these contexts, social 
hierarchy represent s the finite or defined resources from wh ich individuals carved out their 
roles. The evidence would appear to suggest that the interpersonal dynamic of members 
within communities reflect the pervasive influence that the matrilineal line exercises upon 
members.  
Much can be said on the factors accounting for this substantial influence of the matrilineal 
line, but for the purposes of the present analysis three factors in particular stand out . The 
first to be noted in Sakata society is that ancestors, as social model and collective conscience , 
form t he basis of interaction through the symbolic power of rituals. A second important 
factor relates to behavioral patterns. T he living individuals are united in solidarity in  
matrilineal kinship. Gerontocracy, the rule of elders, predominates because elders a nd 
ancestors are in close proximity. Figure 6  below is quite telling  because it  provides a 
concrete illustration of the way in which th is position of elders is constructed in the Sakata 
lands. Figure 6 shows that both the relations between parents and the relations between 
lineage groups display a kind of pyramid whose bottom corresponds to ancestors while the 
top represents the elders.  Finally and most importantly,  it transpires that the communion 
with ancestors and dei ties of the land is expressed through  the hereditary chiefs of 
chiefdoms, villages and lineages who are in turn regulated by the precepts of a matrilineal 
line. Further details of this analysis, and other aspects of the political structure of the Sakata, 
may be pursued in Nkiere’s work (1975) , which serves as a good preliminary to his more 
prolific and insightful scholarship published in 1984. Having already dealt with the  
relationship between kinship and social institutions, a few words need to be said in the next 
point hints to land tenure, inheritance and succession in the Sakata homeland.  
 
 
Research Papers of the Anthropological Institute Vol.3 (2016) 
192 
 
 
 
Living 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.3 Social Control of Land Distribution  
  The value of land is em bedded in social structure and social history of the Sakata 
matrilineally related kin. This is because of a special relationship to the ir deceased 
predecessors and ancestors who are buried in their homeland . My sense from the field is 
that land tenure, social organization, political structure and history are all facets of the same 
reality as viewed from the perspective of unwritten customary law  procedures. 
Traditionally t he Sakata are organized into matrilineal lineages and clans that share rights 
to land. In other words, their unilineal system is based on the corporate property ownership 
and economic interdependence of lineage members.  Indeed p articipants in focus groups 
demonstrate a strong attachment to the land and its resources, referring to the limits  when 
talking about hunting and, in some cases, fishing zones.  
   It is generally considered in all Sakata chiefdoms (Idju) that legal and customary rights 
and obligations govern land tenure, such as rules and expectations that structure access to 
and transmission of use rights to land.  According to local chiefs of my sample, the rights to 
use of the land (usufruct) as opposed to ownership are determined by a designated 
individual or group within the lineage (land chiefs ―Bambe) with several goals in mind: (1) 
each family should have enough land for subsistence purposes; (2) the allocation should be 
equitable so that differences in quality are compensated for by adjustments of quantity; and 
(3) the land is not allowed to d eteriorate but is instead allowed t o life follow  whenever 
there is a need to restore soil structure of fertility. More usually land chiefs ( Bambe) have 
the right to  receive gifts in exchange for their services that can include the promise of 
allocations fr om the annual harvests. Observations during fieldwork confirm  that the right 
Elder 
Practical Solidarity  
Mungabe Kinship Solidarity 
Mythical Solidarity  
Dead 
Ancestor 
Figure 6 Diagrammatic Representation of the Kinship Order among the Sakata  
Source: Nkiere 1984:78  
 
『人類学研究所 研究論集』第 3 号（2016） 
193 
 
to obligatory gifts from land users  is one of the most important prerogatives of being a land 
chief in Sakata society.  Usually the land chief ( Mbe) regulates social control of lan d 
distribution. However, in a small number of cases, as Riddell, Salacuse and Tabachnick  
(1987:43) reported, this duty can be temporary entrusted to his assistant.  
 
The land chief ( Mbe) can assign his role to an assistant ( mami), but in no way can 
this assistant be considered a real land chief nor does he have the power associated 
with the ancestors or the soil. A false land chief will be rejected by the ancestors who 
will withhold the fertility of the soil. Cases were related to us of plants not growing, 
droughts, and sickness all being visited upon villagers who had followed false 
claimants. Of course, it should be added that these stories were told to us by land 
chiefs.  
 
There are also clear indications that in every  chiefdom the ideology of the ancesto rs 
affects rights to land, and historical instances demonstrating that conquered people retained 
rights to land.  It is nevertheless true that recent political and demographic factors have been 
affecting Sakata land tenure, including demographic expansion a nd dispersion of power 
over land among small social groups.  Many observers conclude that the maintenance of 
traditional tenure may actually be one of the most important  ways to ensure the survival of 
the Sakata rural population for the near future.  
 
2.4 Inheritance and Succession  
 The regulation of property inheritance and status succession is a primary function of 
kinship structures  in the society of the S akata. Family property is mainly transmitted 
through the female line. Customs governing the inheritan ce of land, corporeal property, and 
certain skills or lore are owned by a corporate descent group, and usufruct rights are 
inherited upon birth or adoption into a matrilineal lineage.  The succession of power follows 
the matrilineal line.  On this point, how ever, Ridd ell, Salacuse and Tabachnick  (1987:43) 
made some observations which still stand today.  
 
 [In case] it is impossible for a new line of land chiefs to be founded [in a particular 
chiefdom], it is often the eldest son of the eldest sister who become s the next land 
chief ( Mbe). If he declines or for some reason is incapacitated, it is his next-in-line 
brother who takes over. Women can and do become land chiefs but under what 
circumstances was never made clear. Even the frequency of this happening was 
impossible to determine.  
 
 It would be incorrect to infer that  there has been no dispute over succession between the 
matrilineal lineages and clans. At any time a group may be divided among factions 
supporting specific claimants to the chiefdom ( Idju). Most oral  accounts I recorded in the 
Research Papers of the Anthropological Institute Vol.3 (2016) 
194 
 
Mabie chiefdom, for example, report cases which show that disputes be tween those claiming 
individual ownership and those claiming usufruct rights through descent are not uncommon 
given th e competing forms of ownership. Usually, serious  “land disputes are taken to the 
Mudju [traditional political chief]  of the chiefdom who then calls together the land chiefs in 
the disputed area ” (Riddell, Salacuse & Tabachnick 1987:44). Again, it is on the basis of the 
matrilineal kinship i deology that Sakata customary formal legal codes and courts often 
handle these disputes and govern the disposal of property in cases of succession.  The 
matrilineal kinship ideology requires vertical integration of the social hierarchy within 
matrilineal gr oupings. Many cultural forms and institutions developed by the Sakata bear 
little resemblance to the prototypes of their neighboring ethnic groups.  This is not surprising, 
given the considerable heterogeneity of the populations of Mai -Ndombe Province and t he 
conditions under which they had to survive from their pre -colonial settlement to the present . 
 
3. Religious Beliefs, Practices and Experiences 
 
The organizing principles of  religious beliefs , practices, and experiences among the 
Sakata constitute an area that equally proves informative  in regard to their relationship to the 
matrilineal kinship ideology.  My specific focus  here is limited to highlighting some of the 
varied ways in which religious commitments are experienced, organized and transmitted, 
and yet politicized in the  Sakata land s. Issues related to the practice and meaning  of 
traditional medicine or traditional health beliefs and practices , of which Bekaert (2000) has 
given an innovative semantic analysis , were not particularly prominent in the i nterview data. 
My argument is that daily strict respect in religious matters aims not only to maintain social 
cohesion, but also to define Sakata cultural identity.11  
 
3.1 The Hierarchical Triangular Structure of Sakata Traditional Beliefs  
The ethnic reli gion of the Sakata is based on a system of spiritual beliefs, religious 
practices and faith communities  that includes two interpenetrating worlds : the visible world 
of human experience and the invisible world  of various spirits . Traditionally, the  have 
subscribed to the belief that the  invisible world enfolds a hierarchical triangular structure of 
spiritual o rder (Figure 7 ), with the Supreme Being  (Nzaw or Nzame ) at the apex , the 
divinities or spiritual forces (nkyira, mekere), the founding ancestor ( Ngalela), remote and 
close ancestors ( Bale e dzia ), and the “living -dead” ( Bakapfa) at the side. The latter 
concept denotes those w ho died recently and are still regarded as closer to the living and 
not yet assimilated into the rank of the ancestors. In addition  to the above invisible 
‘population’ are the clan protective deities ( Mungabe), magic, sorcery and witchcraf t 
                                                   
11 Unless specifically referenced, this section includes  information gleaned from Sakata communities in 
rural and urban areas . As I earlier mentioned, m ost of the interviews were conducted during summer vacation 
between 2003 and 2007; 2010 and 2015 . It  should be noted that, while one might  be able to obtain an 
understanding of the traditional religious beliefs of the Sakata today, it is not possible  to understand what 
those beliefs were generations ago or how they have been influenced by Christianism, W estern oppression 
and favoritism exercised by colonially selected local leaders . 
『人類学研究所 研究論集』第 3 号（2016） 
195 
 
(commonly called by the single term ilua)), charms, amulets, and other personified forces 
at the base. Statements and references made in the immed iately foregoing paragraphs 
indicate how the Sakata have traditionally subscribed to the belief  that ancestors, spirits, 
deities, and genies of the earth permeate and cover every aspect of human activities and 
their impact is significant for orderly human behavior.  
 
 
 
 
Other data from the above Figure 7 does require brief explanation here . The right and 
left sides reflect the duality of good and evil. The available insights of Sakata myths on 
death and the hereafter suggest that deceased persons always g o through examination by a 
judge seating either near a river or near a large wood. Good people are sent to the right side 
(of the hierarchical triangular structure of traditional beliefs) to be welcome d into the abode 
of the living -dead and ancestors , while bad people are sent to the left side and become bad 
spirits, animals and birds. This ethical detail later becomes important for individual Sakata 
households and communities. The inclusion of  Mbiti’s concept of “living -dead” in the 
diagram underscores tha t traditionally the Sakata have subscribed to the belief that death is 
not the end, but a means of transiting from the inner world to the outer world . Mbiti 
(1991:32) says: “While the departed person is remembered by name, he is not really dead : 
he is alive, and such a person I would call the living -dead. The living -dead is a person who 
is physically dead but alive in the memory of those who knew him [or her] in his [or her] 
life…so long as the living -dead is thus remembered, he [or she] is in the state of personal 
immortality”. This subject is interesting for several reasons. Most notable is that it helps us 
understand the wider African sense of community that includes the deceased persons who 
Figure 7 Diagrammatic Representation of the Hierarchical Triangular 
Structure of Sakata Traditional Beliefs  
Source: Author’s field notes 2003; 2015.  
Research Papers of the Anthropological Institute Vol.3 (2016) 
196 
 
are still regarded as members of their respective families, line ages and clans due to the 
continuing influence upon the living.  
I have spent m uch time  looking deeply into the Sakata religiosity , and more generally 
into the hierarchical triangular structure given above. This structure  is internalized 
individually and c ommunally, and applied in many experiences and institutions. It also 
operates as a subtle, implicit way to relate to the invisible world. The Sakata believe that 
social interaction occurs not only among the living but also between the living and the 
spirits of the dead . Thus viewed, no semantic distinction is made within the matrilineage 
lineages between the living and the dead . Instead the apparent significance of this 
religiosity is reflected in the many collective socio -political and religious endeavors 
organized at the family, village or inter -village community levels, as Sakata practitioners 
strive to fulfill the sacred purposes  suggested by their ancestral religion. It goes without 
saying that  their ability to accommodate and adapt to secular society  and cognitive 
constraints of modernity  has to some extent allowed the development of their sub -cultural 
identity that in turn fuel s their religious vitality.  
The concept mate—the plural of  ote—denotes personified forces  made by human 
production. These are especially objects or ceramic vessels regarded as repositories for 
various genies. Mate are usually identified by the roles they pla y for  individual fami lies 
and communities (Munsi 2004 ). As reservoirs of spirits ’ powers, these vessels can be  
manipulated t hrough human effort, ritual and sacrifice towards benevolent or malevolent 
intervention in the event of conflicting or diseased situations.  The society must thus give 
always accounts to the spirits, guarantees of the proper identity and the historical 
construction of the group . The practice of mate as a recognized form  depends on  the 
preservation of the vessels.  The very fact that there are so many different types of, and 
terms for, mate is an index of how widespread and  important the religious phenomenon i s. 
However, it should be noted that t he use of these ceramic -vessels is not merely a religious 
practice limited to the Sakata and other people inhabiting the present-day Mai-Ndombe 
Province. It can also be found among the Take living around Bandundu city in the Kwilu 
Province and the Kongo in the present -day Central Congo Province (Bwakasa 1973 ) and 
among many other Sub-Sahara African ethnic groups . 
 Despite the adoption of Christianity, it is readily apparent that the majority of the 
Sakata still rely much  on the above traditional religious patterns, including beliefs in magic, 
sorcery and witchcraft (ilua) that give a spiritual dimension to their daily lives.  Ilua entails 
that certain people, including witches, sorcerers, shamans and witchdoctor persons  have the 
ability to cast spells or harm others through indirect, spiritual means. These people use a 
range of strategies, including special methods of healing, rituals or ceremonies, and gift 
offerings to placate these potentially destructive forces. Yet the  Sakata shamans have no 
room to  rule over the social or even the religious life of the community . In this they are  
similar to the Turkish shamans described by Gungor (2002:777). Hence it is not possible to 
『人類学研究所 研究論集』第 3 号（2016） 
197 
 
call Shamanism a religio n: it is rather a summatio n of ecstatic and therapeutic methods 
from the archaic ages on.  
Early literat ure by missionaries, merchants, and ethnographers who had lived and 
traveled in the Sakata lands has supplied the most helpful references to the religious 
foundations of the Saka ta, although their broader cultural context is for the most part 
scantily described . To date, a comprehensive survey of these beliefs and practices can be 
found in Mave (1975) , Nkiere (1984), Bekaert (2000) and Colldén (1971a; 1971b) . One of 
the more consistent finding s is that the traditional religion in the Congo in general and in 
Sakata society in particular is characterized by six integrated and interrelated elements: the 
human as a spiritual being, the ancestors, nature spirits, the spirits of historic  figures, 
practitioners of supernatural powers and the Creator , which have received separately a  
careful and thick description  in Mukenge’s work (2002:36 -43). In the following analysis,  
however, I draw mainly on my own in-depth interview results and long-term field 
experiences to highlight some instrumental and expressive aspects of these religious forms  
in the particular case of the Sakata .  
 
3.2 The Notion of the Supreme Being  
 Traditional beliefs and practices in the Sakata lands  recognize a higher bein g or Sublime 
God (Nzaw or Nzame ), viewed as the creator  and the Absolute power . The sun, moon/s, 
wind, fire, water, vegetation and all other things which exist are His witnesses. Moreover, 
Nzaw is beyond birth and death. He is both merciful and compassiona te. He is beyond fear 
and enmity. He is self illuminated. He is the Master of all the treasures. All our possessions 
are a result of His grace. Nzaw is referred to in  myths and folklore  that articulate cultural 
idioms of the Sakata (For further details, se e Colldén 1979) . One item  demonstrates the 
structural role of religious practices in Sakata lands : Having created the world, the Sakata 
hold, Nzaw (God) no longer intervenes ; he entrusts such intervention to the original human 
beings he created , who  became the ancestors ( Bale e dzia ) of the present -day Sakata 
communities. The Sakata thus ascribe good fortune a nd power to the ancestors, on whom the 
organization of society and the destiny of their individual communities and families depend. 
The following field report expresses one aspect of this religious ethos extremely well .  
 
Everywhere they travelled in the Congo State, Europeans were to find a belief in 
the existence of a Supreme Being who had created the universe. He was not of great 
practical importance  in daily life, since having once created the world he left it very 
much to itself, and lived far away in a celestial village in much the same style as that 
of a Bantu chief on earth.  According to the Basakata, he [God/Nzaw] had created a 
man and a woman, fixed a climbing plant between his village and the earth, and said 
to them: “Now go down to earth by this creeper and stay there. So far as I am 
concerned, my work is over.” So it was not the Creator but rather the intermediary 
powers between God and man w ho were of immense practical importance for daily 
Research Papers of the Anthropological Institute Vol.3 (2016) 
198 
 
living; that is, the ancestors, the spirits, the King, who to some extent participated in 
the life -giving force of the Creator, and who could increase or decrease at will the 
life-force of men living on the  earth. Both the individual and the group had to placate 
these intermediaries, so that their influence would be beneficent, so that they would 
remember to nourish the life -force of man and of society, and would not allow it to 
decrease or disappear . There were two attitudes possible in face of this situation, the 
one religious, when men implored the higher powers for their assistance by prayers or 
rites, and the other magical, when the rites in themselves were thought to be 
efficacious. Of course the two at titudes could exist together in the same person; they 
were not considered to be mutually exclusive. Religion and magic played a very large 
part in Bantu life. Calamities which Europeans would have put down to natural causes 
were attributed to the intervent ion of spirits; thus there was a constant need to placate 
them, and to invoke benevolent ancestors or the divine authority of a chief as a 
counterbalance against these forces of evil. The sowing and the gathering of the crops, 
the initiation of a boy to adult life or the preparation of a girl for marriage, the making 
of a contract, all had to be surrounded with suitable rites which were the affair of the 
community rather than of the individual  (Federation of the Free States of Africa  
2007). 
 
The upshot is  that Sakata families and communities place ancestors in a position of 
greater importance than Nzaw (God). This invites us to consider the rather striking religious 
ideas of, first the nature of the concept of ancestors, and secondly, the nature of the 
communion with the ancestral spirits as needs demand.  
 
3.3 Ancestor Ideology and Its Implications 
The common belief among the Sakata is that God is best accessed through ancestors 
rather than by direct prayer. In particular, the veneration of these ancestors a nd living-dead 
continues to play a great role in the ethnic religion of the Sakata. Much speculation and 
symbolism focus on the belief that the founding ancestor ( Ngalela) and the ancestors ( Bal e 
dzia) intervene in the world of the living. The Sakata believe in the existence of spirits and 
spirit possession, and in the  power of ancestral spirits to influence events . The  ancestors 
manifest themselves in dreams and oracles and are responsible for good and evil in one’s 
life experience. Interview results confirmed the importance of ancestor veneration for the 
Sakata and their sense  of being duty -bound to conform their lives to the will of ancestors , 
whose help is prayed for in circumstances such as childbirth and illness. 
Families and local communities often organize rituals to ensure good socio -spiritual 
relations with ancestral spirits. The lineage headman (mfra-maa) or village headman (Mbe 
ne keyum) is the one who traditionally performs rituals and offers prayers and sacrifices to 
intercede with ‘living-ancestors’. The relationship with ancestors is perceived as a 
‘communion’ with them rather than ‘worship’ of them —an observation that  provides a 
『人類学研究所 研究論集』第 3 号（2016） 
199 
 
deeper understanding of the fact that  in Sakata society, like in many other African 
small-scale societies, a ncestors are not  worshiped, but rather looked upon as spirits that 
continue to live in the world of the living. 12 Association with particular ancestors connects 
with the Sakata respect for the eldest in the community, and  is a way for the community to 
respond to the traditional obligation to interact with the spiritual realm.  
This communion with ancestors  has psychological, sociological, functional an d 
eschatological dimensions , still significant for the Sakata, varying only in degree according 
to the cultural con text in which it takes place. Its psychological significance i s that it  
focuses attention on the ancestor  spirits and induces a contemplative response  from them. 
The link to  ancestors is perceived as a project ion of the relation between father and son. 
The sociological aspect of this perception appears in the sense that communion with 
ancestors expresses, legitimates and consecrates the relationship between the living and the 
deceased parents of the lineage. It thus strengthens the vertical relationship bet ween the 
descendants and the dead, and the horizontal relationship, such as friendship, rights and 
mutual duties of members. At the functional level, communion with ancestors both creates 
the unity of the whole family or community and encourages correspond ence between the 
living and the dead, in order to perpetuate the unity of the Sakata ethnic group. Finally, in 
its eschatological aspect, communion with ancestors denotes a ceremony of collective 
consciousness directed against death in all its forms. From being the end of life, death 
becomes seen as a transition to the abode of the ancestors.   
The places of veneration are varied: at the foot of a tree, a corner  of a forest, a stone or in 
the clan worship house , at the graves or at the crossing of paths . What is evident, however, 
is that whatever the Sakata endure, they strive to maintain a loving experience of place and 
an understanding that  guiding spiritual forces abide in all of these places. Respect for one’s 
ancestors is part of daily life , and people hold a continual dialogue with their ancestors. The 
common idea in the region is that ancestors often bestow favors on the family. People 
prayerfully ask the ancestors to bring them good harvests, and ceremonies are held 
specifically for that purpose. However, if ancestors are displeased by offences such as lack 
of respect to elder, improper use of another stratum’s status markers, incest and adultery , 
they may impose punishments such as mishaps or illness for people, or death for animals. 
Angry ancestral sp irits looming around villages are offered sacrifices  (of chicken or goat)  
and gifts to placate them. The guilty person must then prepare sacrificial offerings to beg 
forgiveness. Ancestor spirits are believed to punish ‘sins’ left unpunished by  Sakata 
individuals in the interests of group solidarity.  
                                                   
12 This notion of communion with ancestors also exits in many African societies. Kenyatha (1938:265-8), for 
example, neatly pointed it out when he discussed ancestors from the vantage point of Kikuyu culture. “In this 
account, I shall not use that them [worship], because from practical experience I do not believe that the 
Gikuyu worship their ancestors…I shall therefore use the term ‘communio n with ancestors’ ”. Thus viewed, I 
amply agree with Kopytoff (2010:320) that “the selection by anthropologists of the phrases “ancestor cult” 
and “ancestor worship,” in dealing with African cultures, is ‘semantically inappropriate, analytically 
misleading, and theoretically unproductive”.  
Research Papers of the Anthropological Institute Vol.3 (2016) 
200 
 
Rituals and ceremonies —which usually involve the Sakata matrilineage as a unit —are 
carried out  to cure sickness and avert misfortune and to  conserve the old age -old 
communion between the living and the ancestr al spirits. Sacrifices meant to annul the 
social and cosmic disturbance brought about by a transgression  may be viewed as the 
restoration of social distance or kinship.  This religiosity is deeply entrenched among the 
Sakata and to some extent defies oblite ration by modern social forces.  When I asked 
informants the raison d’être of this deep and abiding commitment to promoting communion 
with the invisible world, some respondents said that “religious beliefs and practices give us 
a guide to what we must do to  live a meaningful life in a senseless world, and to leave it 
better than we found it.” The majority of interviewees specifically indicated that  “We must 
identify ourselves with others in the community, and do what we can to relieve their 
burdens ―whether by passive means such as prayers and mourning (in case of funerals), or 
by active means of nonviolent protest and the sharing of our goods. They then reasoned: If 
the ancest ral spirits and deities of the land  are not calling  out to  us for justi ce, then to 
whom are they calling? If they are not sending us to bring peace, harmony and hence to 
show a strong sense of solidarity, then who are they sending?” In contrast, only a slight 
number of respondents said that they live without feeling such a st rong social solidarity 
permeated by religious beliefs and rituals, though they often utter scathing criticisms of the 
‘empty formalism ’ of religious practices. The strong ancestor ideology  (including 
shamanism—part of their religion ) still  pervades nearly every aspect of life, even for 
churchgoing Sakata Christians.   
 
3.4 Matrilineal kin-Leaders as Ritual Specialists  
The lines of Sakata community activity reflect historical links between political 
power—primarily embodied in kinship —and spiritual authority  as represented by the land 
chiefs, namely Mbe and Mbianshu. Deputized in accord with rules of matrilineal line, the se 
local leaders have heavily ritualized functions , and are vested with the power and authority 
to regulate the religious life  in Sakata society. The  source of authoritative religious 
knowledge, t hey are ritual agents even in situations where there are priestly guardians of 
communal shrines.  
Matrilineal kinship ideology can be said to have ‘given birth’ to priest -like intercessors 
between the  visible and invisible worlds . Evidence from the field is accruing that  among 
the Sakata the matrilineal kinship ideology links village communities across established 
chiefdoms and reinforces ritual bonds.  These features furnish prestige and stability to t he 
society and personal status to the hereditary leaders. By performing religious activities, the  
matrilineal kin -ritual specialists serve as privileged intermediaries between  the profane 
world of the living  people and the world of ancestral spirits . On some occasions they fall 
into a state of trance in which  the ancestors speak through their persona. In so far as they 
communicate with the world of  ancestral spirits, they are supposed to have knowledge of 
the past, present and future. Unless some very speci al conditions apply, “their role is also to 
『人類学研究所 研究論集』第 3 号（2016） 
201 
 
find lost or misplaced objects, discern the causes of evils inflicted by an energy  spirit and 
exorcise them .” They can handle such task s partly because  they are believed to have 
‘magical power’ to control the evi l spirits , a belief that holds also for other ritu al power 
nodes—diviners, seers, herbalists/healers, and medicine persons —who frequently provide 
protective enhancement and destructive medicine, charms, and amulets. These patterns , 
which are similar to tho se of Põibo and Gyãmi (Kiranti-Kõits words for 'male and female 
shamans) described by  Rapacha (2009:18),  give rise to the persisten t phenomenon of 
sorcery (the use of medicine for evil ends —a conscious art that anyone can learn) and 
witchcraft (a psychic p ower, often hereditary, which may be unconscious). 
Analysis of i nterviews shows that the primary position and the overall effectiveness of 
local prominent chiefs are prominent in people’s mindset and their expectations about 
chiefly authority and its respo nsibilities, since the chiefs are believed to be endowed with 
supra-human abilities and initiated into practices of sorcery and witchcraft (both called by 
the single term ilu’a) necessary for the responsibility entrusted to them  (see Nkiere 
(1984:123-129) These ‘mystical activities ’ or practices offer a clue  to the Sakata’s systems 
of thought and related aspects of their social and political life.  A ‘magical substratum’ 
influences positively the social, political, religious and ritual life of Sakata hereditary chiefs, 
who are to undergo certain occult initiations for  attaining chieftaincy titles  and membership 
in the ‘secret network’ of chiefs, sorcerers and witches.  
At the bedrock of Sakata ancient culture is found the investiture of a chief (Figure 8 ) 
which is still conceived today as a secret, occult initiation performed for about nine weeks 
by a group of sorcerers  and witches who maintain absolute secrecy . Powers of witchcraft 
are thought to be  infused into the chief wh en he was in his mother’s womb. The initiation 
ceremony confirms these powers and renders the newly invested chief conscious of them. 
The ceremony , through miming, marks a sacred moment in his life  and enables him to 
understand, experience, and embody the new way of life.  The secrecy inhere nt in such 
specific rituals reinforced his dynamism and competen ce as a  leader. L ocal communities 
really need active matrilineal traditional chiefs who are capable of invoking the founding 
ancestor ( Ngalela), common ancestors ( Bale e dzia ), earth spirits ( Nkyira), clan deities 
(Mungabe), and personified forces ( mate) to meet needs and resolve problems of the family, 
lineage, clan, and community. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8 Illustration of the 
Investiture of a Traditional Chief  
Source: CEEBA 1975 
Research Papers of the Anthropological Institute Vol.3 (2016) 
202 
 
As intercessors between the living and the ancestral spirits, the matril ineal kin-religious 
specialists are usually entitled to labor services from commoners as well as food shares. 
Such intercession is significant in that it aims  to gain their blessing not only  on key 
economic activities , such as cultivation, harvesting, hunting and fishing , but also on s ocial 
events, such as birth, marriage and funeral ceremonies . In particular, the land chief (Mbe) is 
the representative of the clan of landowners , an indispensable personality for the 
accomplishment of rites associated with fishing and the fertility of the  land and good 
harvest. One of the examples seems, appropriately, to be the fishing ritual related to women . 
At the opening of the women’ s fishing season in summer, as F igure 9 illustrates, the land 
chief (Mbe) used to perform a ritual which consist ed of offering a goat to the genies of the 
earth. He mixed goat’s blood with water from the river in a pot of calabash and sprinkled it 
on the faces and feet of the women by way of ablution. The belief was that th is ensured the 
success of the fishing was assured,  since the genies of earth now controlled this economic 
activity. 
 
                      
  
 
 
 
 
 
     
  
 
   
 
    
   
The above  example may seem simple, but in fact it indicates how the seaso nal rituals 
serve as reminders of the continuing ability of religi ous leaders to make their voices heard 
in the public square. Riddell, Salacuse and Tabachnick  (1987:43), for instance, reported 
that the traditional political chiefs ( Badju) of the Batere  “were recognized as leaders by the 
people because they could perform  the miracle of making cooked manioc produce a 
growing plant”. Specifically with respect to religious practices, the expectation is that 
hereditary chiefs with a name in the S akata lands makes decisions about the disposition of 
fishing sites and hunting te rritories, but they also draw upon personal spiritual power to 
balance human relations to the natural world.  
One aspect of hereditary chiefs ’ religious life  that is even more veiled from the 
observer’s eye than the rituals held o n specific occasions is th e relationship between the 
Figure 9 Illustration of a Ritual for the success of fishing   
 Source: CEEBA 1993:77 
『人類学研究所 研究論集』第 3 号（2016） 
203 
 
‘services’ provided by the priest -like intercessors and the way in which they satisfy the 
‘demands’ of the populations. It must further be remarked  that hereditary chiefs have 
employed rituals to give themselves the best chance o f success. Thus, no activity of any 
importance is undertaken without offering supplications for spiritual blessings. It is entirely 
possible, and likely, that t he chief ’s possession of ‘mystical powers’ and his better 
performance of the ceremony are seen b y Sakata merely as functional prerequisites for 
successful economic activities.  
  During interviews with elderly men from the ruling class (Badju), it frequently transpired 
that hereditary chiefs  have to be endowed with ‘magical powers’ and hence be able to 
respond to such social and religious demands if they are to maintain their standing within 
the structure s of the Sakata. As far as  these demands of power  are concerned , research 
participants indicated that the tight interdependence of economic and socia l patterns in the 
Sakata lands  is created by the way in which the history of the Sakata is remembered, 
narrated, and passed on. The se traditions are regarded as crucial , given that religious 
practices in this context are intended both to achieve a higher standard of living and to 
ensure moral regeneration of Sakata communities.13 In what follows I outline concrete data 
that illustrate people’s perceptions and attitudes to religious ceremonies and rites as they 
now exist. 
  Through interviews I tried to gauge  the extent of relief felt by people after religious 
practices, though some practices were unfamiliar and seemed odd to me.  When asked why 
they attend religious activities (funeral rites, rites of blessing, rites of redress, dancing, 
ceremonies for the ope ning of the agriculture year), the overwhelming majority of 
respondents said , ‘religious activities  meet our requirements and aspirations’, or ‘they 
enable us to fit into the society, since if we ignore these religious assumptions and practices, 
we may fin d it difficult to cope with issues of social life and structure’. Only a s lightly 
higher percentage  of respondents said that ‘we do not receive any striking input in these 
socio-religious activities’. Compared with previous informal interviews I conducted in 
2003, I got the impression that in most villages and cities the proportion of the Sakata who 
show interest in socio -religious activities was increasing, while the number of those who 
dismiss them was declining.  
  It is illuminating that  ceremonies and rites performed by local chiefs in particular appear 
to spur participants to break the border between th e visible and invisible worlds. Charged 
since time immemorial with organizing religious ceremonies, hereditary chiefs  continue to 
provide the means for the Sakata to conform to the conservative customs of Christianity 
while privately preserving their own religi on, traditions, and world view.  
 
                                                   
13 Among the offences that will warrant the destoolment of a chief in the Sakata homelands and surrounding 
regions are a chief that is mentally deranged, a chief that is found in an act of fraud and, as a result, arraigned  
before a court of competent jurisdiction and a chief that has amorous affairs with a married woman who is not 
his wife. 
Research Papers of the Anthropological Institute Vol.3 (2016) 
204 
 
3.5 Religion in Public Sphere: Implications for Informal Education  
Years of fieldwork among the Sakata impressed upon me the intriguing consideration that 
religious beliefs and practices have direct consequences for informal education in rural and 
urban settings. Two areas in particular stand out . First, religious support for education of the 
masses occurs in the afo rementioned rites of intensification , which  not only  teach 
participants respectful, reciprocal relations that must be maintained between the living and 
the dead , but also  affirm their kinship with the multiple forms of their homeland. Second, 
religious sup port for education is found  in folk dance and music , performed in  various 
circumstances such as the investiture of the chief, the birth of twins, wedding s, mourning, 
funerals, and burial ceremony.  
In the public sphere, however, Sakata folk bands generally perform the dance commonly 
known as Moyene. They sing various songs, both  from the traditional Sakata repertory and 
popular songs inspired by the changing social conditions in their env ironments. All these 
songs convey significant messages for mass educat ion.  The tremendous contribution of the 
Bana Nzoyi folk band (see Munsi  2014) shows how  folk bands provide Sakata households 
and individuals with a broad picture of the Sakata worldview (ceremonies, protocols, 
teachings and knowledge of history ) while ensuring the continued existence of their original 
identity in rural and urban settings . Substantial evidence has accrued that some of the Sakata 
songs pay tribute to or belittle people they know, characters who have lived among them and 
ultimately joined the collectivity. In that way, positive memories and connections are evoked 
and passed on through generations in eulogies or panegyric forms. The role of this music 
bears out the observation  that, “although we normally think of tradition as something being 
handled forward from the past to the present, the appeal to the authority of tradition, 
something that is socially much more central, involves being handed back from the present 
toward an indeterminable past destination” (Bloch, 2005, 131).  
 
Sakata religious patterns can also be experienced and learned as prominent dan cers 
enthusiastically integrate  into the dance performance the use of supernatural powers. The 
following excerpt from personal direct field observations  gives striking examples of th is.  
 
In the initial summer of fieldwork (2003) in Bandundu city I also had the 
opportunity of witnessing  the facets of the Sakata folk dance called Moyene. On 
two occasions, 4 April (Sunday afternoon) and 5 April (Monday afternoon) 
respectively in Bonkuku and Salamin ta (the remote areas of Bandundu city), on a 
warm sunny day with puffy white clouds floating across the high blue sky , hardly 
one hundred  people gathered in a large circle for the Sakata dance and music 
Moyene. The audience was composed of Sakata families and other urban dwellers 
from different ethnic households found in Bandundu city, as well as outside 
spectators. This well -known folk dance and music of the region was, in the guise of 
personified spirits, skillfully performed from 3:30 p.m. to 6:30 p.m. b y a young 
『人類学研究所 研究論集』第 3 号（2016） 
205 
 
Sakata chief, healer, soothsayer and dancer (one of my key informants) named 
Joseph Monsengwo, alias ‘Mongankolo’ (a nickname inspired from Elima Ngando 
Mongankolo, a Sakata siren for protection), accompanied with other experienced 
folk dancers ( seven men and three women) and three managers (two men and one 
woman).  
Dancers first appeared in a queue before the congregation coming from a 
particular house chosen in advance where they had gathered for a short preparatory 
recollection. Following the tradition of the Sakata , they wore raffia cloth and the 
skin of wild animals, with hats o f bird’s feathers, and waists gir ded with loincloths. 
Their forehead was painted with black powder mixed with kaolin ( ngula) and 
girdled with a disc of copper intricate ly tied with a heavy copper wire. Unlike in 
rural localities, their dancing style was then interspersed by circles, some songs 
from a tape recorder, spontaneous shouts and phrases, with jumping steps in accord 
with the rhythm of the drum and music, and the  launching of spears at  a short 
distance, as well as the invocation of supernatural powers.  
In the third phase, d irect observations showed that the Sakata folk dance Moyene 
came to be  articulated under specific spiritual principles and criteria that elude  
ordinary understanding, and it climaxe d in invocation and body shaking.  It included 
many actions performed by  the prominent dancer or the central figure , including 
climbing a particular tree ( ute) and stepping on fire while dancing . Shaking his 
body in the rhythm of Sakata folk music, Mungankolo step ped forward from the 
main circle and took the direction of the chosen tree. At that specific time, as he 
explained to us, that  particular tree became symbolically a ‘mystical tree” in the 
forest and was surroun ded by the protector spirits. As Mungankolo was dancing on 
the branches of the tree, suddenly a branch of it was cut off and he fell down with it 
on his shoulders. Th at this caused no injury he saw as confirmation that the dance 
was successful, and that th e spirits had collaborated with him. After a brief moment 
of silent prayer, Mungankolo started dancing while carr ying on his shoulders the 
same branch with green leaves  that he had brought down from the tree. When he 
arrived in the middle of the wide danci ng circle, he stepp ed son the branch s everal 
times. 
Gathered in this space, other members of the dancing group st ood in a wide 
circle surrounding some pieces of fire wood. Three men step ped forward from the 
congregation and set  fire to it  while the manager of Mungankolo observed them 
carefully to ensure the spiritual security of his chief . Soon, a bonfire was blazing. 
Following the signal of his manager, Mungankolo then made a move toward the 
fire. After a brief moment of silent contemplation, he started dan cing and steeping 
on the fire, without being burned, while holding a bell for invocation in his right 
hand and improvising shouts. At the end, some members of the dance group 
collected the burned pieces of firewood and store d them in a place that had been 
Research Papers of the Anthropological Institute Vol.3 (2016) 
206 
 
prepared beforehand. People were strictly forbidden to use them lest misfortune 
occur in the near future. The congregation remained there for a while, observing the 
way in which members of the Sakata folk band started resuming their procession 
back into the house. To the whole congregation (with youth s outnumbered adults), 
it was one of the most solemn social and religious occasions for learning by 
observation and practice.  
 
  More is going on here than  simply the idea of setting a good example. The apparent 
significance of this narrative for social life is that specific cultural and religious techniques 
are used to highlight the facets of the Moyene dance, such as  communicating with the 
supernatural forces by invocation, hymns, incense, copper bell, prescri bed movements of 
hands, arms and legs, as well as climbing a tree and dancing on its branches, and dancing on 
the fire. Given the symbolic nature of this performance, every word, gesture and object here 
is important for both the performers and their respec tive congregation.  Such e mbodied 
cultural performance , whether consciously lear ned or unconsciously absorbed, is  a crucial 
means of instilling ideologies, beliefs, and values systems in the bodies of subjects .  
Although local activities of a spiritual and religious nature are practiced all over the Kutu 
and Bandundu regions , the vibrant practice of the folk dance Moyene is quite distinctive in  
that it emerged over the past decades as an event that expresses key elements of Sakata  
identity. Informal education through ceremonies and dance is also a factor in the relationship 
between the matrilineal kinship system  and religious forms. This sequence implies that the 
matrilineal kinship ideology has an impact on people’s informal education which in turn has 
implications for the kinds of things that members of different households do in  the public 
sphere.  
 
3.6 Individual Psycho-Religious Representations 
Our surveys included particularly questions on the reasons and purposes for which the 
Sakata continue to maintai n their contact and communion with the invisible world of 
ancestral spirits.  As noted above, religious culture and values are lived individually or as a 
group, and the two realities are implemented in the pattern of religious understanding and 
interpretation in the Sakata homeland. The strength of th ese findings is partly marked by 
the individual analysis pattern  or the practitioner’s overlapping religious motivation, 
validation and self-consciousness. Consider the following quantitative data.  
  As shown i n Figure 10 below, w hen asked about attitude s towards communion with the 
spiritual realm, a surprising 6 5.4 % of youth, and 86.4% of adults, indicated that such 
communion was not only important but a traditional obligation for them. On the other hand, 
34.6% of youth and 13.6 % of adults indicated that they paid only slight attention to the 
spiritual realm. 
『人類学研究所 研究論集』第 3 号（2016） 
207 
 
0
50
100
Obligation Non
obligation
Adult
Youth
 
          
   
Moreover, w hen a sked why communion with the invisible world of Nzaw (God) and 
ancestral spirits (Bale e dzia ) was so strong in the local setting, multiple reasons were 
offered. Fully 83% of rural respondents and 80% of city residents indicated that they 
communicated with the spiritual realm to guarantee security of  life. 78% of rural 
respondents and 66% of peopl e in cities indicated that the intercession of ancestors, spirits 
and deities was the reason for the prosperity of their family, clan, territory or land  (Figure 
11).  
0
20
40
60
80
100
Security Reconciliation
Urban
Rural
 
    
However, these results should be balanced with consid eration of whether security and 
prosperity were enough to justify ancestor veneration. To a large number  of interviewees, 
the achievement of a sincere reconciliation between the  world of the living and the spiritual 
realm stood as an important justificatio n for these religious rites. Further investigation 
revealed that while religious practices had a greater following in rural areas than in urban 
areas, some urban household members still h old strongly to traditional beliefs and 
practices.  
One further examp le should suffic e. Findings outlined in Figure 1 2 below illustrate that 
the rate of religious practice wa s increasing steadily in 2003 and this trend has been 
maintained through to 2010. An analysis by household in rural areas and cities reveals that 
the i ncrease is underpinned by the quest for security and purification. This communion 
with the invisible world through rituals is not simply one option among many. Rather it 
expresses and makes present the core reality of the religious and cultural identity of  the 
Sakata in my research communities.  
Figure 10 Characteristics of Ancestor Veneration among the Sakata  
   
 
Figure 11 Reasons for communion with the Invisible World  
Research Papers of the Anthropological Institute Vol.3 (2016) 
208 
 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
Invocation
 
 
From the above quantitative findings, one can garner some interesting information. We 
learn, for example, that over the past decades , the number of the Sakata who have interest 
in socio-religious realities or find it difficult to live without some form of religious support  
has increased significantly , while the number of those who remain inattentive to them  has 
increased only incrementally. Beyond that, we notice that Sakata households’ attachment to 
religious traditions is an essential part of the daily regimen. T his spiritual experience, at the 
very least, has a force and effect on the psychology of the participants. It is a vital element 
in their lives; it heavily influences their t hought and behavior . It is passed on from 
generation to generation.  This point requires some elaboration.  
Two realities or forces ensure the passing on of this belief as a unity comprised of the 
world of the living and the spiritual realm . The first force , which guarantees that Sakata 
tradition is preserved , is the matrilineal line. It continues to exist as a social se t up which 
gives responsibility―a responsibility taken seriously ―to certain of its members. A second 
important force is chiefl y dependent on three factors: (1 ) cohesion of Sakata household s; 
(2) solidarity and maintenance of the extended family; and (3 ) hierarchy, security and 
prosperity. True healing is intimately linked to these processes of interaction with the 
invisible world, which must be actively sought after. We have emphasized that in Bandundu 
city, for instance, various manifestations of all these rural -derived forms of life a nd beliefs 
in migrated Sakata groups demonstrate not only the retention of rural -based ethnic identity, 
but also how religious ideas basically determine their attitudes towards the social and the 
cultural sphere in urban localities.   
Taken together, these findings provide a clear understanding of  how precisely  it is that 
socio-political and religious systems a re instrumental within Sakata society. This is partly 
because these traditional institutions , more than anything else, continue to make matrilineal 
kin-leaders and local social institutions appear to be so much more relevant and meaningful 
to the lives of the Sakata. The intriguing reasons for this are varied. One of the most 
important is the peculiar fact that the se social and religious forms are seen as a very 
conservative force because they are directed particularly to those ancestors —who are 
responsible for setting up the social structures of the S akata—and to their demands and 
taboos. It is germane to suggest, in the words of Hendry (2008:144) that “[…] moral values 
and the ideas that [are] termed religious pervade social life so completely that neither can 
Figure 12 Rate of Religious Beliefs and practices between 2003 and 2010  
 
『人類学研究所 研究論集』第 3 号（2016） 
209 
 
be clearly separated from the rest of social interaction”.  A more detailed consideration of 
these social rules and the various mechanisms for the ir enforcement  can be found in 
Nkiere’s seminal work  (1984:130-146). Remember, finally, that the kinship ideology and 
religious foundations of the Sakata are not independent areas of social life, but are closely 
related and both are indispensable to unders tanding the working of Sakata society as a 
whole. 
 
4. Discussion 
 
   This ethnographic study presents a first step to understand ing patterns of socio -political 
and religious organization of the Sakata. The first striking finding  is that th e matrilineal 
kinship rules of the Sakata continue to be the catalyst which enables the Sakata to further 
their social relations and to preserve structures that have existed since time immemorial.  
One can observe the continued effort of t he Sakata to further locate themsel ves in social 
relations of kinship both with human and, through dream encounters, with the interactive 
spirits of their environment.  In this kinship formation , solidarity  and its reciprocal  
obligations constitute a real social imperative. The key to unders tanding this lies in the fact 
that solidarity—which is expressed in various circumstances, such as  marriage, death, 
important decision -making—implies the threefold representative relation of three spheres: 
the world of the living, the symbolic domain or ri tual, and the spiritual realm. Not 
surprisingly, the present-day Sakata tend to have a deep awareness of these social and 
spiritual experiences and on some occasions speculate about their significance and 
meaning. 
The credit of having been the first to ful ly recognize th e social significance and 
implications of this solidarity belongs to Nkiere Bokuna Mpa -Osu. In his seminal book, 
entitled La parenté comme système idéologique  chez les Basakata (1984), he suggested that 
the ideological aspect of the Sakata k inship lies in the sentiment of so lidarity which 
animates parents . S olidarity among the Sakata is also a system of prohibitions that has a 
twofold pre condition: (1)  social reproduction of people and perpetuity of clans, and (2)  
hierarchy of individualities , which finds its meaning through the preeminence of ancestors 
in relation to descendents, elders in relation to the young persons, and group in relation to 
individual (Nkiere 1984:15 ; for further details, see Nkiere 1984:78 -103).  
The kinship norms of exo gamy are apparently more extended among the Sakata than 
among their immediate neighboring linguistic groups  (Nkiere 1984:73). Still following 
Nkiere, we must add to this discussion the peculiar fact  that these kinship norms of 
exogamy continue to determine  patterns of settlement  among the Sakata , without of course 
threatening the unity of matrilineal groups in their present localities. This evidence supports 
research undertaken by  Holy (1996:105) who highlighted that  empirically “[…] the 
matrilineal groups can remain vital and manage to remain localized in spite of residence 
rule which ostensibly hinders their localization …the coherence of the matricentric family 
Research Papers of the Anthropological Institute Vol.3 (2016) 
210 
 
of a woman and her chi ldren, brittle marriage and high individual mobility thus make 
possible the drift of lineage members back to the village which is regarded as the traditional 
centre of their matrilineage and their concentration there in spite of the centrifuga l effect of 
virilocal residence”.  
  Equally crucial to  this discussion is the hereditary patterns of political organization . 
Structurally, if not social ly or psychologically , speaking, the society of the Sakata 
continues to function, in large measure , according to its customary laws. I earlier referred 
to Sakata leadership offices as being hereditary, according to the matrilineal line. The 
matrilineal kinship system also gave birth to a kind of priesthood dedicated to preserving 
the way of l ife embedded in the matrilineal -based Sakata ethnic group.  I have emphasized 
kinship strategies and re lations of solidarity above. It is important to add here that  the 
political dimension of the Sakata kinship is in fact the privileged instance of the logic al 
articulation of the mechanism of the solidarity.  Despite the hierarchical order found among 
the Sakata, our research reveals that in its complexity, the social organization of the Sakata 
can be grasped on the basis of its horizontal aspect marked by some differentiations and 
oppositions between spouses, fathers and sons, people and chiefs, between ruli ng clan and 
clan of the landowners. In this regard, the Sakata history records several factual causes of 
conflicts which give credence to the assumption that in many societies “individual chiefs 
compete with each other to secure followers and optimize thei r positions” (Hann 
2004:117). 
A further and important point has been the influence of the  matrilineal kins hip system of 
the Sakata in shaping their consciousness and helping  them to cultivate a sense of individual 
and collective identity , or of “social mem bership and identity as individual configuration’ 
(Moore 1994:30). Such patterns of biological, social connection and psychological binding 
are seen as potent means for the Sakata to maintain their ethnic identity in the face o f 
modern changes. This empirical observation amply confirms Nkiere’s (1984) core assertion 
that the matrilineal descent system of the Sakata continues to exist within the  process of 
modernization as a “ guiding ideological syste m”. Yet the tradition of political organizing 
within chief doms ( Idju) and village communities ( ibue) has to be recognized as a living 
intangible heritage that is, I suggest, inextricable from the Sub -Sahara African perspective 
which to some extents houses the tradition of the present -day Sakata. Of course, such a  
vitality of the cultural specificity in a given Congolese ethnic group is not only found among 
the Sakata. Ethnographic data, mainly from other matrilineally organized societ ies in the 
hinterland of the Congo, have also shown  this. Along with the work of Kopytoff (1964; 
1965) among the Suku, the empirical study of the Buma carried out by Hochegger (1975) is 
a case in point. Theoretically, the above evidence for the role of social institutions of the 
Sakata is in line with ethnographers who forcefully argue  that social institutions of every 
ethnic group possessed a remarkable internal dynamism and progressive potential which 
enabled them to cope with entirely new situations ( For ethnographic examples, see Futurs 
『人類学研究所 研究論集』第 3 号（2016） 
211 
 
Africains 2003; Lewellen 2002; Shorter 2001; V an Binsbergen 1998 ; Magesa 2006; M biti 
1991). 
The second important result that emerged from t his study is that religious beliefs and 
practices serve to preserve social relations and structures in Sakata society. Equally they 
dictate the arrangements of rel ations between the Sakata, the natural environment and the 
invisible world of God ( Nzaw), ancestral spirits ( Bale e dzia) . The interactivity of those 
three is such that the Sakata also act upon the world they inhabit with nature and ancestral 
spirits. Prev enting the natural world from devolving into a state of chaos is the goal of 
certain religious activities . Discretion towards nature and the ancestral spirits  is essential, 
since they nurture human life.  This finding reflects the conviction, to use Birago Diop’s 
expression, that , “the dead are not dead” (Healey and Syberts 1996:212) and so remain in 
constant relationship with the living.  Thus different rituals (especially rites of 
intensifications) and practices (more usually with ancient roots) that accomp any and 
highlight religious experience are instrumental here  in restructuring  and revitalizing the 
society of the Sakata. This reflects the acknowledgment  that “[in] establishing the society of 
the dead, the society of the living regularly recreates itself ” (Hertz 1960: 71-72) and “that 
single statement illuminates much about the nature and meaning of the processes and 
procedures which link the living and the dead” (Prior 1989:111) . 
Nevertheless, t hese sorts of  religious concepts, ideas, experiences, and pra ctices are not 
confined to the Sakata alone, but are extremely widespread. For instance, they can be found 
in many other ethnic -linguistic groups within the Congo, namely among the Zela 
(Boulanger 1974; 1 982) and the Yanzi (Thiel 1972)  and in many parts of  the world . 
Another important example of a broad comparative synthesis comes from Gungor ’s 
(2002:777) recent evaluation of the traditional Turkish religion. 
 
The tradition of honoring and presenting sacrifices to ancestors is one of the 
most important elem ents of the traditional Turkish religion. It is the sense of 
gratitude felt for the ancestors, which makes up the foundation of the cult of the 
ancestors. Not all ancestral spirits or graves become the subject of the cult but 
only the most respected reach that level. Because of this, it becomes necessary to 
differentiate “the cult of the dead” from “the cult of the ancestors”.   
 
How does then the triangle God , nature, man account for the present-day Sakata? In 
response to this question,  Okolo (1978:2; 1996:177) makes a remark which I find confirmed 
in this particular case of the Sakata : The traditional sub-Saharan African is a religious 
person. “Religion is the main principle that dominates his life and sets a define tone in his  
relationship with nature and his fellow man.  The triangle of God, nature, and man is 
inseparable because these supreme beings form one same reality. Religion is not , therefore, 
something extraneous to the Africa n, a beyond in his experience” . Indeed, the instrumental 
role of religious  patterns as essential elements of social experience and their implications in 
Research Papers of the Anthropological Institute Vol.3 (2016) 
212 
 
people’s modes of life and social institutions has long been recognized (Durkheim 1976; 
Monaghn & Just 2000; Knighton 2005; Womack 2005).  
The notion of communion with ancestors  is the point  to which would be surprising if that 
were not the case. Looking at interview results and direct observations, we realize that 
memory of the deceased predecessors  is also at the core of their religion. Th is is partly 
because they Sakata pray t o their dead  and memorize them as if still closely attached to the 
living within matrilineal kinship networks. Memory and its ritual enactment transcend the 
separation between the living and the dead. Theologically, there is no divide between the 
dead and the living among the Sakata. This is an aspect of religious behavior that fits both 
the African worldview (Nkafu 1998:116 -121) and African theological and ethical 
perspectives (Bujo 1998:17). Actually the meaning of such a communion with ancestors 
does not essentially differ from that of the communion of saints in Roman Catholicism. This 
is a conclusion recently drawn by Mpongo (2001:4, 6), who shows that the communion of 
saints in Roman Catholicism is the “transposition of the pagan funeral practices from the 
Mediterranean milieu into Roman Catholicism”. Viewed in that light, considerable efforts 
have been made by the Catholic Church in the Congo (the dominant Church in the area since 
the nineteenth century) to integrate the communion with ancestors and sai nts into Christian 
worship. The first evidence we have of deliberate efforts to achieve a genuine inculturation 
of Christianity  is the Congolese Rite for Eucharistic celebration which was officially 
approved by Vatican in 1989 (see Uzukwu 1985; Egbulem 199 6; Moneley 1988 and Munsi 
2007, Conference Episcopale  du Zaïre 1989 ). This striking pastoral outcome no doubt 
highlights the responsibility of the Congolese Church to carry on a dialogue with the 
traditional African beliefs and values of the people.  So it would be absurd to consider as 
‘superficial’ or as complete superstition all these basic religious ideas and symbols.   
Our study  introduces into this discussion the notion of  the eschatological aspect of the 
communion with ancestors as a ceremony of colle ctive consciousness against death in all its 
forms. Viewing this notion of eschatology from the vantage point of African ethics, Benezet 
Bujo observes that the cult of ancestors in Africa contains both eschatological and salvation 
dimensions. He defines sa lvation as the “concern of both the living and the dead members of 
the community” and argues that the “eschatological dimension involves a participation in 
that other world where the dead live and where is to be found the key of the  fate of the 
living” (Bujo 1992:24). Apart from the idea of present gain (pleas for safety of family and 
home, for success business, for freedom from illness and natural disasters, abundant life and 
harvest and catches of fishes and wild animals) found in the prayers of the Sakata and many 
other small -scale societies found in Congo and elsewhere in Africa, there is also a striving 
for salvation in the afterlife. This does not contradict Christian teaching, which stresses 
fulfillment in the next life but which also strives after ha ppiness in the present world . 
  Closer reading and analysis of th e social phenomena  pertaining to mass education 
outlined in this study can also raise a crucial question . What really remains or survives in 
the transmission of  knowledge and values from one generation to another, even if the 
『人類学研究所 研究論集』第 3 号（2016） 
213 
 
absolute is considered inessential?  Elements are transformed and reactualized in different 
contexts, responding to circumstances, so that they appear to re structure themselves in the 
social regulation process. Th is kind o f identity ‘constructs’ itself over time and from the 
vagaries of public space. This provides researchers with an exceptional opportunity to 
revisit the vibrant urban practices of Sakata folk dance and music. Usually, anthropologists 
describe, explain and interpret such practices in  terms of human behavior, not as single raw 
‘facts’ or ‘stereotyped’ behaviors but rather as social phenomena. It is possible, according 
to Legrain  (2014), to argue –perfectly validly, if not somewhat simpl istically– that these 
social phenomena serve as holders of expressed or latent intentions and values prized by a 
historical community according to certain standards of conduct promoting certain attitudes 
or execrating other different attitudes. Given that communities and indiv iduals constitute 
all these values, it is important for researchers to acquire an accurate  grasp of the ways in 
which the subjects being studied try to communicate themselves verbally and symbolically 
by organizing intelligible signs  in their social world . In the case of the Sakata folk dance 
and music, the best recording methods would also include not only photographs of the  
performers, but also individual in situ visual observations, recording and photographs.  
These findings from interviews, which reveale d the depth of Sakata religiosity, were 
reinforced by quantitative data. Just as significant, from the psycho logical standpoint, is the 
fact that religious ideas and symbols are imprinted in the minds of the Sakata collectively by 
their material environmen t and social interaction.  It is also evident from the contents of this 
paper that the fusion of religion and economic and political activities is seen in all aspect of 
the Sakata’s experiences and struggles . Many Sakata of my sample  appear to be prepared t o 
sacrifice themselves for their religious ideals. It is generally understood that conformity with 
the will of ancestors is shown by the observance of social mores that have been practiced 
from the distant past. Thus “the religious patterns of the Sakata s ignificantly regulated 
socio-cultural values and generated conformity in order to direct their real impact upon the 
social model”  (Nkiere 1984:19) . Theoretically, these findings also reflect the psycho-social 
functions of religious beliefs and practices th at have been acknowledged in anthropological 
literature (West 2007; Bowie 2003; Havilland 2002; Bennett 1996; Mathews 1994; 
Rappaport 1979 ; Middleton 1960 ). In general, therefore , it seems likely that the utilization 
of behavioral methods ( Graves 2004; Bloch 2005; Greenwood 2005) in future investigations 
may help the researcher to depict  the great variations inherent in the social and 
psycho-religious representations of the Sakata. 
The last important point for consideration, which I have made several times in this paper, 
concerns with the continued existence and vitality  of religious activity and beliefs among the 
Sakata. This interpretation subscribes to the view that religious practices and thought have 
not suffered severe decline in modern societies. Rath er they “have continued to perform 
important functions for individuals and society as a whole” (Bilton et al. 2002 :425; for 
further details, see Magesa 1998 :16-40). I am fundamental ly in agreement  with Davie  
(2007:77) that “[…] religion is not something th at disappears in modern societies, but 
Research Papers of the Anthropological Institute Vol.3 (2016) 
214 
 
something which ebbs and flows in all societies over the long term ”. The religious traditions 
of the Sakata c ontinue to be deeply entrenched and to  defy obliteration by modern social 
forces. 
Bergson (2003 [1932])  thought of religion as being both a static and a dynamic reality. 
His view was that people can either preserve a system of beliefs , so that their religion will 
remain static , or they can abandon it . However, there is a third way, which allows the 
preservation and continuity of the external expression of their religion and rituals, but also 
allows a gradual transformation of the content of the beliefs. This evolution of religious 
thought is something dynamic. While their basic ideas of their relationship with Go d and the 
ancestors can change , f or example w ith the adoption of Christianity , the y can still re tain 
mystical or magical elements from the traditional beliefs they have inherited. In conformity 
with this Bergsonian view,  which applies to the Sakata , “scholars have argued for a 
perspective that recognizes the uneven quality of modernization and the ability of traditional 
values and institutions to coexist with modern ones ” (Kilbria 1999:319). 
Our study has found that matrilineal priest -like individuals/inter cessors play a significant 
role in carrying out religious activities, which in turn allow Sakata individuals to preserve 
the age -old communion between the living and the dead ( Bakapfa). This reflects 
Middleton’s (1960:  v) empirical evidence gleaned from Lu gbara communities in Uganda, 
whereby “[the] cult of the dead is intimately connected with the maintenance of the lineage 
authority. The exercise and acknowledgment of this authority are bound up with the cycle of 
lineage development”. It also matches the a ssertion that black African communities know 
“no distinction between individual, social and political life; but life can be enjoyed in its 
fullness when ancestors are remembered and honored” (Bujo 1992:23).  
 
Conclusion 
 
 This article has proposed an unders tanding of the most salient socio-cultural and religious  
traditions that enable the Sakata of the Congo to reta in their original ethnic identity in 
changing social environments. The study yields two important results: first, despite the 
social forces of mo dernization, the matrilineal kinship ideology and the religious 
determinants continue to form the centre of cultural life and identity for the Sakata. The 
second important result is that a significant positive correlation  exists between the 
matrilineal kin ship ideology and the religious forms. It is quite clear that such 
interrelationship is historically contingent and culturally determined , and hence holds one 
of the key s for the understanding of Sakata society as a whole . The matrilineal descent 
patterns of the Sakata play a decisive role in ordering and shaping their religious beliefs 
and practices. Conversely, their religious beliefs and activities can be said to ‘ ensure’ the 
continuance of the ir matrilineal kinship ties  that have existed from time immem orial. In 
general, therefore, the present study provides a refined interpretative tool for demonstrating 
how these two areas of social life  function as a conservative force that enable  the 
『人類学研究所 研究論集』第 3 号（2016） 
215 
 
matrilineal Sakata ethnic group to keep to  this day its identity and coherence.  
 
 
References 
Anstey, R. 
1966. King Leopold’s Legacy. The Congo under Belgian R ule (1908-1960). Oxford: Oxford University  
     Press.  
Axinn, W.G . & Pearce, L.D. 
2006. Mixed Method Data Collection Strategies . Cambridge: Cambridge University P ress. 
Ayisi, E.O.  
  1997 [1972]. An Introduction to the Study of African Culture . Nairobi: East African Publishers.  
Barbara, E.,  
  1988 [1979]. Léopold II. Le royaume et l’empire . Paris-Gembloux: Duculot. 
Bayens, M.  
1913-1914. ‘‘Les Lesa’’. Revue Congo (IV/3): 129-143; 193-206; 257-270;321-336. 
Beattie, J.  
  2002 [1960]. Bunyoro: An African Kingdom . San Diego, California:  Harcourt College Publishers.  
Bekaert, S.  
  2000. System and Repertoire in Sakata Medicine. Democratic Republic of Congo . Uppsala: Uppsala  
       University Press.  
Bennett, C.  
  1996. In Search of the Sacred. Anthropology and the Study of Religions . London and New  York: Cassell. 
Bergson, H.  
2003 [1932]. Les deux sources de la morale et de la religion . Paris ; PUF. 
Bilton, T. et al.  
  2002. Introduction to Sociology . London: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Birmingham, D. 
 1981. Central Africa to 1870. Zambezia, Zaire and the South Atlantic . Cambridge: Cambridge University  
Press. 
Bloch, M. (ed.) 
2005. Essays on Cultural Transmission . V ol.75 of London School of Economics Monographs on  Social  
     Anthropology. Oxford: Berg. 
Bompere, Ne Malibi D.  
  1958. «  Ndzur Bakin  » (J’ai questionné les vieux ).Première partie.Histoire des Basakata. Trans lated from 
Kisakata version by  N.M.Mputu,1 998. Kinshasa: Ronéo.  
Bondarenko, D.M.  
  2006. Demoarchy: A Principle of Culture’s Organization. The 13 th-19th Centuries Benin Kingdom as a 
Non-State Super Complex Society . Moscow: URSS.  
Boulanger, A. 
  1974. Yambe à l’aube des symbols. Essai d’anthropologie religieus e Zela (Rep. du Zaïre) . Bandundu: 
Research Papers of the Anthropological Institute Vol.3 (2016) 
216 
 
CEEBA Publications. Series II, V ol.21. 
1982. Societé et religion des Zela . (Rep. du Zaïre). Bandundu:Ceeba Publications.Series II, V ol.82.  
Bostoen, K. 
 2006. ‘‘What comparative Bantu pottery vocabulary may tell us  about early human settlement  in the Inner  
Congo Basin”. Afrique et Histoire, (vol. 5): 221-263. 
Bowie, F., 
2003 [2000]. The Anthropology of Religion. An Introduction . London: Blackwell Publishing  
Bujo, B.  
  1992. African Theology  in its Social Context . Maryknoll: Orbis Books. 
 1998. African Christian Morality at the Age of Inculturation . Nairobi: Paulines Publications Africa.  
Bwakasa, T.K.M. 
1973. L’Impense du discours. ‘‘Kindoki’’ et ‘‘Nkisi’’ en pays Kongo en République du Zaïre. Kinshasa :  
      UNAZA-CEDAF. 
Bylin, E. 
 1966. ‘‘Basakata. Le people du pays de l’entre-fleuve Lukenie-Kasai,’’ Studia Ethnographica, 
 Upsaliensi, XXV: 37-46. 
Colldén, L. 
  1971a. The Traditional Religion of the Basakata . Berlinska, Boktryckeriet, Lund: Studia Ethnographica, 
Uppsaliensia, XXXIV . 
  1971b. Un condensé de caracteristiques essentielles des conceptions religieuses du peuple de 
 Sakata. Uppsala University Press.  
  1979. Les trésors de la tradition orale Sakata . Proverbes, mythes, legendes, fables, chansons et           
       devinettes de Sakata . Stockolm: Uppsala University Press.  
Collins, R.O. (ed.).  
  1993. Problems in African History : The Pre-colonial Centuries (Topics in World Histories          
V ol1.). Princeton: Markus Wiener Publishers. 
Conference Episcopale du Zaïre  
  1989. Présentation de la liturgie de la Messe. Supplément au Missel romain pour les diocèses du Zaïre .  
       Kinshasa: Editions du Secrétariat Général . 
Cornevin,R. 
  1963.Histoire du Congo-Léopoldville. Avec 19 cartes et 54 photographies . Paris: Editions Berger-Levrault. 
David, M. & Sutton, C.D.  
2004. Social Research: The Basics . London: Sage Publications.  
Davie, G. 
2007. The Sociology of Religion . London: Sage Publications.  
Denis, J. 
  1935. ‘‘L’organisation d’un peuple primitif’’. Revue Générale de la Colonie Belge . (Avril, tome 1/4). 
  1954. ‘‘Chez les Basakata’’. Grands lacs CLXX, 6.  
De Saint Moulin, L.  
2003. ‘‘Conscience nationale et identit és ethniques : Contribution a une culture de la paix ’’. Congo-Afrique  
『人類学研究所 研究論集』第 3 号（2016） 
217 
 
     (43/372) :93-136:  
De Witte, P.  
  1955. “Taalstade bij the Basakata ”. Turveren So. De 11 homme, V ol.10. 
Dollahite, D.C.  
  1998. “Fathering, Faith, and Spirituality”. J. Men’s Studies (7):3-15. 
Durkheim, E. 
  1976. The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life . London:Allen&Unwin.  
Egbulem, C.N.  
  1996. The Power of Africentric Celebrations. Inspirations from the Zaïrean Liturgy . New York: Crossroads 
Publishing Company. 
Eriksson, D.  
  2006. Bridge building and the restoration of roads in the rural areas of the Democratic Republic of Congo  
A case study in the Mai Ndombe region, populated by the Basakata people.  MA Thesis.  Royal 
Institute of Technology, (KTH), Stockholm, Sweden.  
Fabian, J. 
2001. Anthropology with an Attitude. Critical Essay s. California: Stanford University Press.  
Federation of the Free State of Africa   
  2007. African Nations and Territory Identity: The dismantlement of  
       African Land and Nations and the artificial construction of the 1872 Colonial Africa c. -1960 c.  
       www.africafederation.net (Accessed on 25 January  2016) 
Futurs Africains 
  2003. Afrique 2025. Quels futures possibles pour l’Afrique au sud du Sahara?  Paris: Karthala. 
Graves, T.D. 
2004. Studies in Behavioral Anthropology . New York: Altamira Press. 
Greenberg, J.  
1996. ‘‘The Language of Africa’’. In R.Collins (ed .), Problems in African History , 78-85. New York:  
     Marcus Wiener 
Greenwood, S.  
  2005.The Nature of Magic. An anthropology of Consciousness . Oxford, New York: Berg. 
Grinker, R.R., Lunkeman n, S.C. & Steiner, C.B.  
  2010. Perspectives on Africa. A Reader in Culture, History, and Representation . Second Edition. London:  
       Wiley-Blackwell. 
Gungor, H. 
  2002. The Religion of Ancient Turks., V ol.1. Istanbul: Yeni Turkiye Yayinlari.  
Hann, C. 
  2004 [2000]. Social Anthropology. London: Hodder and Stoughton. 
Havilland, W.A. 
  2002. Cultural Anthropology. Tenth Edition. Australia: Wadsworth Press. 
Healey, J. & Syberts, D.  
  1996. Towards an African Narrative Theology . Nairobi: Pauline Press . 
Research Papers of the Anthropological Institute Vol.3 (2016) 
218 
 
Hendry, J. 
  2008. Sharing the Worlds. An Introduction to Cultural and Social Anthropology . Second Edition.    
       New York: New York University.   
Hertz, R.  
1960. “A Contribution to the Study of the Collective Representation of Death ’’. In R.Needham and C.  
       Needham (eds), Death and the Right Hand . New York: Free Press. 
Hochegger, H. 
  1975. Normes et pratiques religieuses chez les Buma . Bandundu: CEEBA Publications. Series II, V ol.26. 
Hochschild, A. 
  1998. King Leopold II’s Ghost. A Story of Gree d, Terror and Heroism in Colonial Africa . New York: 
Mariner Books. 
Holy, L. 
  1996. Anthropological Perspectives on Kinship . London: Pluto: Press. 
Kenyatta, J.  
  1938. Facing the Mount Kenya: The Tribal Life of the Gikuyu . London: Vintge Books. 
Keegan, W.F. & Maclachlan, M.D.  
1989. “The Evolution of Avunculocal Chiefdoms: A reconstruction of Taino Kisnhip and Politics”,  
     American Anthropologist  (91): 613-630. 
Keesing, R.M. & Strathern, A.J.  
  1998 (1971). Cultural Anthropology. A Contemporary Perspec tive. Third Edition. New York:  Harcourt 
Brace College Publishers.  
Kilbria, N.  
1999. “Migration and Vietnamese American Women: Remaking Ethnicity”.  In  Stephane Coontz, Maya  
     Parson & Gabrielle Raley  (eds.), American Families: A Multicultural Read er, 318-330. New York:  
     Routledge.  
Knighton, B. 
2005. The Vitality of Karamojong Religion. Dying Tradition or Living Faith ? Aldershot:Ashgate   
    Publishing. 
Kopytoff, I. 
  1964. “Family and Lineage among the Suku of the Congo. ” In F. Gray& P.H. Gulliver (eds), The Family  
       Estate in Africa, 83-116. London:Routledge.   
  1965. “The Suku of Southwestern Congo. Peoples of Africa ” In J.Gibbs. Jr, (ed.), The Peoples of Africa,  
       441-78. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston. 
 2010. “Ancestors as Elders in Africa.” In Grinker, R.R., Lunkemann, S.C. & Steiner, C.B .(eds),  
      Perspectives on Africa. A Reader in Culture, History, and Representation . Second Edition.   
314-322.London: Wiley-Blackwell. 
Lawson, T. E.  
1984. Religions of Africa - traditions in transformation . San Francisco: Harper and Row.  
Legrain, L. 
2014. Chanter, s’attacher et transmettre chez les Darhad de Mongolie . (Collection Nord-Asie 4). Paris:  
『人類学研究所 研究論集』第 3 号（2016） 
219 
 
     Centre d’Etudes Mongoles et Sibériennes -Ecoles de Hautes Etudes.     
Lewellen, T.C. 
2002. The Anthropology of Globalization. Cultural Anthropology Enters the 21 Century . London:  
     Bergin&Garvey. 
Magesa, L. 
1998 [1997]. African Religion. The Moral Traditions of Abundant Life . Nairobi:Paulines  Publications  
    Africa.  
  2006. Anatomy of Inculturation. Transforming the Church in Africa . Nairobi:Paulines Publications Africa.  
Mathews, F. 
  1994. The Ecology Self . London:Routledge.  
Mattson, M. & Stage, C. W. 
2003. “Contextualized Conve rsation. Interviewing Exemplars.” I n Robin Patric Clair (ed), Expressions of  
      Ethnography. Novel Approaches to  Qualitative Methods . 107-118. New York: State University of  
      New York Press. 
Mauss, M.  
1968. Sociologie et Anthropologie . Paris: P.U.F. 
Mave, M. 
1975. Tradition et changements. Les Basakata (Rép. du Zaire). Bandundu: Ceeba Publications. Series II,  
       vol.25. 
Maxwell, J.  
  1996. Qualitative Research Design: An Interactive A pproach. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.  
Mbiti, J.S. 
 1991 [1975]. Introduction to African Religion . Second Revised Ed ition. London: Heinemann International  
            Literature and Text books.  
Meditz, S.W. and Merrill, T. (eds).  
1994. ZAIRE: A Country Study . Fourth Edition.Washington, DC: Federal Research Division,Library of  
       Congress.  
Middleton, J.  
  1960. Lugbara Religion: Ritual and Authority among the East African People . London: Oxford   
       University Press for the International African Institute.  
Monaghan, J. &Just, P.  
  2000. Social and Anthropology. A very Short Introduction . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Monoley, R.  
  1988. “The Zaïrean Mass and Inculturation ” Worship (62:5): 433-442. 
Monse, I.  
1987. Eléments de Grammaire Sakata (BC 34). Parler de Mongobele  (République du Zaïre).           
     Bandundu: CEEBA Publications, III, 15.  
Moore, S. F. 
1994. Anthropology and Africa. Changing Perspectives on a Changing Scene . Charlottesville  and London:  
     The University Press of Virgina.  
Research Papers of the Anthropological Institute Vol.3 (2016) 
220 
 
Mpongo. L.  
  2001. Nos ancêtres dans l’aujourd’ hui du Christ. Rome: Editions de la Sodalite S aint Pierre Claver. 
Mputu, N. M. 
  1999. Cent ans d'Evangelisation du Mai -Ndombe (Diocèse d'Inongo) par les Pères de Scheut . Kinshasa:  
      Edition du Jour Nouveau.  
Mukenge, T. 
 2002. Culture and Customs of the Congo . London: Greenwood Press.  
Munsi, R. V.  
  2007. The Dancing Church of the Congo. Missionary Paths in a changing Society . Mödling: CEEBA  
       Publications. CD ROM. Series III, Vol.169.  
  2004. Social Institutions and Folk Religion among the Sakata  of the Congo. (MA Thesis). Kanagawa  
     University. 
  2014. Ubwaa. Folklore Sakata (Groupe Bana Nzoyi, Bandundu). CD& DVD Format Recording at Studio  
       Ngayime (Kinshasa) and published by CSM Production (Vienna).  
Ndaywel .N.I.  
  1998. Histoire générale du Congo. Paris and Brussels: De Boeck & Larcier.  
Nkafu, M.N. 
  1999. African Vitalogy. A Step forward in African Thinking.  Nairobi:Paulines Publications Africa.  
Nkasa,Y .T. 
  2005. ‘‘Intégration de l’autorité coutumière dans les structures politico -administratives coloniales et  
      postcoloniales au Congo /Zaïre’’. Anthropos 100 (2): 415-26. 
Nkiere, B.M.  
1975. ‘‘L’organisation politique tradition nelle des Basakata en République du Zaïre’’. Cahiers du CEDAF  
     (7-8) , Série I. Extract from Ph.D. Thesis (Université René Descartes/Sorbonne, 1975 -1976). 
1984. La parenté comme système idéologique. Essai d’interprétation de l’ordre lignager chez les Basakata.  
     Kinshasa: Faculté de Théologie Catholique de Kinshasa.  
Okolo, C.B. 
  1978. The African Church and Signs of Times: A Socio -Political Analysis. Kenya: GABA Publications.  
 1996. “The African Experience of Christian Values: Dimensions of the Problematic”. In Okere Theophilus.   
      (ed.), Identity and Change:  Nigerian Philosophical Stu dies, I., 173-186. (Cultural Heritage and  
      Contemporary Change Series II). Washington, DC: The Council  for Research in Values and  
      Philosophy. 
Parrinder, E.G .  
1962. African Traditional Religion . London: S.P.C.K. 
Parkin, R.& Stone, L. (eds.). 
  2004. Kinship and Family. An Anthropological Reader . Oxford: Blackwell Publishing. 
Patton, J.K.  
2014. “Considering the wet homelands of indigenous Massachusetts”. Journal of Social Archeology . V ol.  
     14 (1): 87-111. 
Prior, L.  
『人類学研究所 研究論集』第 3 号（2016） 
221 
 
1989. The Social Organization of Death. Medical Discourse and Social Practices in Belfast . Eastleigh&  
     London: The MacMillan Press. 
Rapacha, L-S.  
2009. A Kiranti-Kõits Ethnography. The Tribal Fascination of Sikkim . Leipzig: University  
     of Leipzig Press.  
Rappaport, R.A. 
1979. Ecology, Meaning, and Religion . Berkeley CA: North Atlantic B ooks. 
Reardon, R. S.  
1968. “Catholics and Protestants in the Congo”. In C.C. Baëta (ed.), Christianity in Tropical    
      Africa, 83-100. Oxford University Pres.  
Riddell, J.C, Salacuse, J.W. & Tabachnick, D.  
1987. “The National Land Law of Zaïre and Indigenous Land Tenure in Central  
      Bandundu, Zaïre”. Land Tenure Center Research Papers No 92. University of  
        Wisconsin-Madison. 84-126. 
Rowlands, M.J.  
1971. “The Archeological Interpretation of Prehistoric Metalworking ”. World Archeology (3:2):210-224. 
1973. Modes of exchange and the incentives for trade, with reference to the late European prehistory. In 
Renfrew, A.C.(ed.) 
1973. The Explanation of Culture change , 589-600. London: Duckworth.  
Russell, B. H. 
2006. Research Methodology in Anthropo logy. Qualitative and Quantitative Approaches . Fourth Edition.  
     New York: Altamira. 
Schneider, D.M.  
1965. “Kinship and Biology ”. In A.J.Coale et al. (eds). Aspects of the Analysis of Family Structur e, 83-101 
     Princeton: Princeton University Press . 
Shorter, A., 
  2001 [1998]. African Culture. An Overview. Social-Cultural Anthropology. Nairobi:Paulines Publications  
       Africa.  
Schatzberg, M.G .  
  1988. The Dialects of Oppression in Zaïre . Bloomington and Indianapolis : Indiana University Press. 
Slade, R.  
1962. King Leopold’s Congo. Aspects of the Development of Race Relations in the Congo Independent  
    State. London: Oxford University Press.  
Spear, T. 
1996. ‘‘Bantu Migration s’’. In R. Collins (ed.), Problems in African History , 95-98. New York: Marcus  
      Wiener. 
Thiel, J.F. 
  1972. La situation religieuse des Mbiem . Bandundu: Ceeba Publications. Series II, V ol 1. 
Tonnoir, R. 
  1970. Giribuma. Contribution à l’histoire et à la petite histoire du Congo équatoriale . Tervuren: 
Research Papers of the Anthropological Institute Vol.3 (2016) 
222 
 
 Musée Royale de l’Afrique Centrale.  
Turner, J.H. 
  2003. Human Institutions. A Theory of Social Evolution . New York:  Owman & Little Field 
 Publishers. 
Uzukwu, E.E.  
1985. “Inculturation of Eucharistic Celebration. Celebration in Africa.  The Eucharistic  Celebration and  
     Inculturation in Zaïre ”. African Studies (1):18-20. 
Van Binsbergen, W.M.J. 
  1998. “Globalization and Virtuality: Analytical Problems posed by the contemporary transformation of 
African societies ”, In Meyer, B. & Geschiere, P.(eds), Globalization and I dentity: Dialectics of Flow 
and Closure, 273-303. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.  
Vansina, J. 
1966a. Introduction à l'ethn ographie du Congo . .Kinshasa: Editions universitaires du Congo.  
1966b . Kingdoms of the Savanna . Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Pr ess. 
1984. ‘‘ Western Bantu Expansion’’. Journal of African History  (25):127-145 
1990. Paths in the Rainforest . Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.  
1992. “Kings in Central Africa”. In E. Beumers & H. J. Koloss (eds), Kings of Africa. Art and Authority in  
     Central Africa, 19-26. Maastrcht: Foundation Kings of Africa.  
1994. “Antecedents des royaumes Kongo et Teke”. Muntu 9:7-49. 
1995. “New Linguistic Evidence and the Bantu Expansion”. Journal of African History : 73-195. 
1999. Paths of Political Deve lopment in equatorial Africa and  Neo-Evolutionary Theory. In S.K. McIntosh  
    (ed.)., Beyond Chiefdoms. Paths to Complexity , 166-172. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.  
West, H.G. 
  2007. Ethnographic Sorcery . Chicago and London: The University of C hicago Press. 
Womack, M. 
  2005. Symbols and Meaning. A Concise Introduction . New York: Altamira Press. 
 
